---
layout: post
title: "Aurora : where some things may have begun for me"
published: true
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

Most reviews I read that discuss this game only focus on the game's main campaign. It's understandable (and I don't think it's great either), but to many people, myself included, this isn't what the game is about.

NWN is a D&D game, based on the 2.5 ruleset. It's complex. For years I had no idea what it was about. I still know very little about it.

This game is one of the few I am certain has significantly impacted some of my life choices (Super Smash Bros. Melee being another).

Would this website exist if I hadn't been given this game by my father when I was 14 or so ? I'm not sure.

<!--more-->

Few of the intricacies are truly necessary to play the game, however, and even in my early teens I was able to complete the somewhat underwhelming main campaign, enjoying the music and combat along the way. Some of the areas I passed through were very interesting and thought-provoking, but the overarching adventure, and the level layouts didn't grip me. I moved from one area to another unfazed.

If all you're looking for is enjoyable D&D vanilla gaming, then the expansions are better at, uh, being that, in my book. The first one is eerie, and cold. The second is epic, intense, occasionally puzzle-heavy, and its last chapter is a long tunnel, a world that feels dreary and desolate, it's a fight against hopelessness, and a quest for purpose and meaning. My brother loved the second one, and he doesn't play videogames.

What makes Neverwinter Nights fabulous, quite possibly my favourite game amongst those I've played so far, is its engine, bundled with the game. 

(Though it's a fondness made somewhat lukewarm through knowing I missed part of its heyday, and never spent as much time on it as I would have liked to. It's also a bittersweet reminder of some of the reasons that I'm likely never going to be a gamedev).

The engine is extremely flexible. People have created pseudo-MMORPGs with it. D&D nuts can implement mechanics and tools for game masters to use in-game, which is something few engines really easily enable. Multiplayer can accomodate for up to 64 players at a time. This number stunned me at the time. I'm still baffled by it now.

I played this game online once. In 2013 or so. I logged on to a server, got messed up by people with proper D&D character builds, and then logged off, heh.

There are reimaginings of the game that turn it into an RTS. That change character classes and set it into the future. Community expansion packs. Graphics filters that turn it into a 2007 game, instead of a 2002 one. Tilesets, characters, models, music tracks, NPC voices, spells, items, everything is moddable or scriptable.

I stumbled upon the engine by looking at the game folder when I was 16. I had no idea what *programming* was, nor that the game engine was available, nor what a game engine was. No one had ever told me, I'd never read about it. Friends didn't know, my family wasn't interested.

This chance find was fascinating. I learned some scripting, read up on things, tinkered with engine a little bit. It was fun.

(I'm glad I can still faintly remember what things were before internet and smartphones and all that junk took over, though I also wish I'd known and learned about programming earlier. I don't think this kind of late discovery would happen now in western countries, or only extremely rarely, since most video game players are a little more aware of how computers work and the creation process than I was at the time).

I never made anything noteworthy with the Aurora (too scattered, too lazy, not dedicated enough, and the list unfortunately goes on). But this was shortly before my studies began, and likely heavily influenced some of my study and career decisions later on.

And understanding NWScript also made me appreciate other people's creations, some of the nifty tricks and hacks they pulled off to get some interesting system or bit of eye-candy going.

(For instance, in one of the In the Company of Thieves modules, there's a fountain from which jets of water spurt out and splash back in. The module author created an invisible object, which a small invisible mage in the fountain would cast Magic Missile at before teleporting in a slightly different location).

And the stories.

Some of these modules are some of the best stories I've ever played. A Dance With Rogues was amazing. I have no idea how many thousands of hours the module author spent on this, nor how she came up with such a vibrant and intricate city. 

You're a princess, your parents' castle is besieged, and the defense line has just been broken. A servant tries to help you escape, but is shot down. Some shady rogue drags you out of the castle just in time, only to rape you. He drops you at an inn, where you end up working for eight months or so. After an unsuccessful escape attempt, you meet someone who tells you that perhaps you could still play a prominent role in helping fight against the now settling-down invader. First though, you have to prove your mettle.

I love this module. It's incredibly immersive. Each street has a name, each house a number. You're a puny princess, so a couple of hits and you're out, unlike true D&D rogues. Stay in the shadow. Stay unnoticed, except when you want to be noticed. When you wear a servant's outfit, people's behaviour noticeably shifts.

Full-frontal nudity has been added to character models. Potter about naked and you'll get arrested. Walk around the docks at night and you will find trouble. You can use your body as a means to accomplishing your goals, should you choose to. A Dance with Rogues' world is mature, and doesn't hide behind a veil of shame. 

Its is much much better than the Witcher 3's open-world, its story doesn't bullshit you, the choices you make aren't artificial. Oh, and you can't steal people's shit with no consequence.

I'm still hoping Part 2 will be updated to conform to Part 1's last changes. I've been waiting five years. I'll wait a few more, if need be. In the meantime, perhaps I'll occasionally look for more modules. (And perhaps give the Enhanced Edition a go ?)

10/10