---
layout: post
title: "The best 60's spy film AND the best 60's spy game so far ?"
published: true
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

I played this back in 2012. 

I loved it back then, and still love it now, though some of the reasons why have changed a little.

No One Lives Forever has been summed up by some as a kind of spoof of the Bond movies of the 60s... ? I agree there is some common ground there (and my uninspired review title reflects this), but the game is so much more than that.

<!--more-->

Graphically, I think it looks amazing. Dated, sure, some character models are a little angular. But not that much.

The colour palets, the architecture. The lighting and the textures that some games of that era had make them seem much more believable than recent games. I think there are a couple of reasons for that, but I won't delve into them here.

The music is very nice, very appropriate to the tone and setting the game is going for. An early foray into dynamic adaptive music. I think it works well enough here. Tracks are still catchy and don't become some diluted colourless atmospheric forgetful ambient that I dislike in other games that've gone down that path.

There a bonus CD with 6O's-style tracks made specifically for the game. I rather liked most of those tracks, and in this DLC and free-to-play 10-euro-per-skin era, I find that to be a big breath of fresh air.

In terms of plot, Cate Archer is a new recruit in a spy organisation, UNITY, whose field agents are being murdered one after the other after info was leaked out. Being new to the organisation, she's not been leaked to the enemy (and she's also not dead), so it's up to her and her mentor, some aging refined Brit with a very nice accent to get out there and work out what the fuck is going on.

Nothing too out-of-the-ordinary at first glance. However, it only takes a few lines of dialog or a few paces ingame to realise that NOLF is special.

The dialogs are very well written. Characters feel like they're interacting naturally, exchanging believable banter. They all have personality. And the game is very funny, too.

Not only that, but Cate Archer is, -at least that's how I remember her- a well-written female character in a videogame. 

How so ? Several reasons. I won't spoil all of them.

Because Cate is a woman in a man's world, and she and other characters react to it in various ways. One of your superiors highly disapproves of you (and of Bruno) and makes sniding comments at every available opportunity. Cate bites back with oft-superior wit. Other characters who come across you are sometimes surprised, sometimes cocky, sometimes indifferent.

Because no one had asked the writers to check the 'feminist qutoa' checkbox. The mainstream video game industry has amazingly low standards for female characters (well, any character, really, but non-male ones especially). Cate blows most of them out of the water. She feels genuine, likeable, human. She's her own woman, and there's no need for the writers to justify anything about their decision. And cripes, does the game feel refreshing because of this. Cate is a central component to the story and atmosphere, and the fact that she's a woman plays an important and believable part without becoming the game's sole focus.

There are other colourful female characters, too. This game passes the Bechdel test with its eyes closed.

The story gets to be fairly complex but remained interesting throughout. Some twists and very very likeable characters helped a lot in that regard. Excellent voice acting, as well.

It does get to be extravaganza and over-the-top, which is something I dislike of games that try and convey a dark or serious story but being over-the-top is what silly spy films of the 60s were about. This is fully justified here (and highly entertaining). This game doesn't devolve into clichés either, it plays around with them.

Another oddity : you sometimes get some choices during conversations. Yeah. Most are inconsequential, but at times the player does need to understand some things about Cate's conversations partners in order to move forward with things. It's only a small detail, really, but it is an interesting addition, and the game's humour also makes those conversations always a delight to encounter.

In terms of gameplay, it's a first-person shooter. But Cate is no muscled-up knucklehead. She's smart. And compassionate. And she's a spy. So no indiscriminate shooting here. You can't kill civilians, and most of the time you need to stay undetected. Sometimes being spotted means instant failure.

NOLF is therefore mostly an infiltration game, with some action setpieces here and there. You often can and sometimes have to shoot everything that moves. But the game mostly actively discourages you from doing so. It tries to make you care about your enemies. 

By being stealthy and remaining unseen, Cate gets to listen in on HARM (a terrorist organisation) employees' conversations. All the funny and sometimes philosophical quips they might come up with paint a very human portrait of Cate's enemies, and along with the gameplay it definitely very often made me think twice about going in all guns blazing, even when it could be the easier way of making progress.

Some people only took this job at HARM through necessity. Most of them just want to go home after a tedious day's work. This game makes me care a little about them, and laugh at their humorous discussions. 

Don't get me wrong, this isn't deeply introspective, but it's still a nice touch. You can play through the game without killing most enemies.

This being a 60s spy setting, you get to mess around with some gadgets. Some lethal, some non-lethal. Cate's toolset ends up being pretty diverse and rather fun to play with.

The level design is another highlight. The game is fairly linear and doesn't pretend to be otherwise. But the places you get to visit all feel very coherent. The architecture makes sense, as does the layout. You end up exploring all sorts of places -remember, this is a 60s spy game. Situations Cate has to face are quite varied. I was never bored. It's a fairly long adventure, too. It took me 20 hours to finish it the first time around.

The AI is quite all right, especially for the time. It's aged much better than many other games I've played, including recent ones. It's more complex than in most games. Enemies react when one of them is hurt, if they spot your footsteps, and behave as somewhat coherent groups. They do line up a little too often when running around. I haven't tried the game on hard mode, though.

It's all about the little touches, too. Shooting a camera instantly sets an alarm off (and why wouldn't it ? In fact, why doesn't it in many other games ?), and so does a camera spotting a body. Most games didn't do things that way at the time. 

There are no explosive barrels in this game, if my memory serves right.

Call of Duty 12 : Modern World War II 5 probably doesn't do this. Its AI is inferior to this game's. This game is 19 years old.

It isn't perfect. Some parts felt a little frustrating. Some clichés remain. But boy, did I have fun back then. And do I look back at that time fondly now, even setting aside the novelty and nostalgia. 

This game may have made other experiences less enjoyable by raising my expectations considerably and broadening my horizons a little. In terms of storyline, character maturity, level design and gameplay consistency. I believe that to be a good thing. You won't get to know how good games in the future could be by being complacent and accepting conventional samey pastiche that is too afraid to take risks. This game took some risks. I think it's great. It feels genuine, and it also says something meaningful, ultimately. I think it still holds up. I don't think the sequel fares quite so well.

Besides, considering this came out in 2000 and wasn't major AAA material, what excuses do all those games that have come out since then have ?

The game is hard to find these days, but I say it's well worth it. 

Forget your CODs and your Battlefields and Kojima, Cage and all the failed watered-down hollywoodian drama. This was a better stab at telling you a cinema-inspired story. And has better gameplay. This is probably a better game to draw inspiration from to move onwards than most.