---
layout: post
title: "The name's Bond. James 'Call of Activision™' Bond."
published: true
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

When I can feel my brain slowly shutting down while playing a game, I generally feel that something is wrong.

This is supposed to pay homage to Goldeneye 007 (which I've never really played, but do know a little about (I've played Timesplitters 2 and 3 though)). 

Nothing of the sort. This is a cheap and, uh, substandard (?) Call of Duty clone. Which is saying something, I guess.

<!--more-->

I mean yeah, Bond this Bond that, James bla bla there's Bond in there, sure. But you can only lug around two weapons, no more, your distance to your objective is permanently indicated onscreen, you breathe and puke for a few seconds to regenerate. Except in *hard* mode, where you have a life bar. Perhaps this says something about the noticeable shift FPS has undergone in the past 15 years.

You pretend to be stealthy until you're close to the next checkpoint, then you can run towards it all guns blazing because once the next zone is loaded, everything resets. I'm sure no one behind that gate heard those gunshots and explosions, after all. Let's go back to pretend stealth mode. 

I suppose Bond is a sort of pretend fake spy (in his depictions outside of a couple of the early books, anyway). So perhaps this might make sense when considering this as its own entry in the franchise.

But as a homage to the *game* Goldeneye ? No. This is COD : Wii Bond edition, now with more QTE and terrible AI.

The AI is really bad. It's functional, I think. But really really simple and stupid. Enemies appear to run about and move from one cover to another without paying attention to what the player is doing. It completely undermines the level design, I feel. It also sometimes made me feel like the game was taking me for an idiot. Which it may very well have been. I don't often feel that way about a game.

This game didn't make me feel like Bond, or make me learn anything interesting about him. It didn't feel like Goldeneye either, or anything even remotely resembling it. QTEs and on-rails sequences. The local multiplayer was empty of thrills. I haven't watched much of the film, but seeing Craig's face in a sequence which should probably have been Brosnan also felt off.

I don't see any good reason for this game to exist. Even the premise "paying tribute to a classic FPS" bugs me. I'm not sure Goldeneye has aged that well for most people. I'm not sure how much any kind of remasterixehashing would be able to trick me into believing otherwise. Goldeneye for the Wii will likely be forgotten far more quickly than the original.

3/10