---
layout: post
title: "Short reviews, many"
published: true
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

Here are some notes on a few games I've played before 2015. I was 7 years old in 2000, so bear that in mind when looking at the approximate dates. 

There are many others. Longer reviews will get their own posts, but I'll add some more short notes here as time goes by.

<!--more-->

## Call of Duty 4 : Modern Warfare (~2014)

Ugh. You mash the fire button in the general direction of the enemy, take some bullets, regenerate. Hide inside a house. 200 enemies line run in and line up to be mowed down one after the other. You're bullied into going to the next checkpoint.

The last level in the game has you motorboating down a river at breakneak speed, with hundreds of enemies shooting at you. And failing to kill you. Woaw.

This isn't a 'new level of immersion and intensity never seen before'.

Immersion died in its cradle when the IA quickly showed its limits, and the story started going haywire. As for intensity, go hide behind a rock and breathe a few seconds.

But for all its flaws, I admire its ambition. The dev team knew they were working on something big. The graphics are amazing, the music is, uh, immersive or something, the multiplayer lasts ages, it's intense, you shoot people, it's a great update to an already amazing franchise. I'm sure its sequel will be even greater, I can't wait to play it, I would preorder it already if I could.

9/10

I'm kidding.
The last paragraph was a joke. If only I hadn't read it so many times elsewhere with no intent at making dry humour whatsoever.

3/10


## God of War : Ghost of Sparta (~2012)

Pretty little meaningless setpieces, but the game sucks away at my neurons and brainpower, and leaves just enough to complete the shallow puzzles that are interspersed between two massacres perpetrated by Kratos.

The gameplay is mindless and deadening (I genuinely got the impression the game was slowly turning me into a stupider person, I wasn't kidding earlier when I said it drained my brainpower), the main character is some souped-up grunting idiot, the greek mythology is mercilessly butchered for the benefits of visceral conflict. The gaming worlds lauds and applauds this.

Not my cup of tea.

2/10

## Lego Harry Potter : Years 1-4 (~2011)

Extremely generic (lego look excluded) collect'em'up. The only meaningful rewards you get for trudging through some generic simple platform puzzling are some occasionally mildly amusing cutscenes.

4/10


## Metal Gear Solid : Portable Ops (~2010)

Back in the day, I was hooked and spent 20 hours over 3 days playing this game. This was very unusual for me at the time. I'm not sure I'd be drooling all over it today. I liked the fact you could recruit enemies and assign them to different tasks. And the gameplay and storytelling were new to me at the time. Hey, I was 16, and had parents that restricted my playing time and didn't want me to play violent games. I am very grateful to them for this, looking back on it, even if it annoyed me to no end back then.

Nowadays, I think I'd find this game slow, the gameplay repetitive, and the story too silly and over-the-top to be sucked in the way I was 10 years ago.

5/10


## Metal Gear Solid : Peace Walker (~2013)

Never finished that one. The series' pacing felt already a lot more banal, and the slow storybuilding, extravagant and posing characters also were getting old fast. The gameplay adds a few new interesting mechanics in, but it's been a while since I've played this, and I don't think those additions were enough to make up for my growing boredom at the time.

4/10


## Dr Kawashima (~2009)

Why, Nintendo, why

This game bugs me. The brain age thing is bullshit. How did Nintendo endorse this ? Do people take the age thing seriously ? I hope not.

5/10


## New Super Mario Bros. (~2009)

Got tired of it pretty fast. I finished it, but I don't even know why I bothered. Past the first few levels, there was no enjoyment to be had.

4/10


## Shatter (~2014)

Bought that game for its very catchy soundtrack. I shouldn't have, in this instance. It's a brick-breaking game, that tries to be different with levels where your pad can move in a circle around the blocks. It's functional, with nice presentation, I suppose. Variety and fulfilment likely abound for those who like that sort of thing. The pace is too slow for me, the menus were too much about giving me a sense of achievement that didn't really feel right, given that I couldn't remember one level from another five minutes after having completed them.

5/10


## Dr. Langeskov, The Tiger And The Terribly Cursed Emerald: A Whirlwind Heist (~2015)

The Stanley Parable, patronising (even in the title, 'Parable') and aimless as it was, was somewhat surprising at first. I don't think it was anything new or original, though. This one is more of the same, without the surprise. It's an attempt at making a mediocre joke you've already heard last half an hour, with pretend decisions to give you the impression there's a point to what you're doing and that you've got control over it. 

I hope the people behind these games start doing other things at some point.

2/10


## Kirby's Dreamland (~2002)

This is an odd game, really. Who is this cream puff that eats enemies up ? Everything is cute and mellow. It's rather peaceful, it's easy. You're not fighting against nature, for once. You float around, take your time.

I remember being able to finish this in both normal and hard mode under an hour or so. I used to think games like this were for newer players and that 'gamers' moved on to other stuff. 

I'm not so sure about this now.

(I say this about 'newbie' vs 'gamer', but I'm uncertain I ever really thought that way, because I came back to this game every now and then. Maybe it wasn't a fully conscious assessment, which I'd blame at least in part on gaming magazines' tones).

6/10


## The World's Hardest Game (~2009)

It's not.

5/10


## Wii Sports (~2009)
 
Sports games aren't my cup of tea. For several small reasons. I never warmed up to this. I never bothered making Miis, either.

I remember my father playing this and quickly realising he could swing the controller in any direction and it'd still register as a hit. He doesn't play games (with a few occasional exceptions), and he quickly went back to other things. I don't really see how I could blame him here. The future of videogames this wasn't, not mechanically, anyway.

People tend to like the bowling in this game, from what I've gathered. I'm not sure I ever tried it.

4/10


## Wii Sports Resort (~2011)

Well well well. Swing your controller one way and a sword swishes the same way onscreen. This looks promising. It's still a sports game, but it doesn't feel like it's cheating me. There's something here.

It's a shame Wii Sports wasn't this game. A shame for me, anyway. I feel like games could really have played around with control schemes. None of the dozen or so Wii games I've played were that original in terms of controls, except perhaps Wario Ware : Smooth Moves.

6/10


## Super Mario Galaxy (~2011)

The first half-hour or so was mesmerising. Slick visuals. The Mushroom Kingdom in turmoil. Bowser looks BIG. Shit is going down, as US people like to say. Orchestra music. Drama. And then, space, and the peaceful aura of Rosalina.

Space, certainly, but not freedom. Where 64 and Sunshine encouraged you to explore levels you revisit several times, understand their layout and how you may move within them, Galaxy provides you with fire-and-forget levels you can't move around within freely. You're guided from one section to the next, never to return. The 3D is interesting, but there are so few spots where jumping can really be exploited to its full potential. A somewhat pointless hub, in comparison to the previous games.

Levels offer many different ideas, but it all quickly got tedious for me. I was barely able to finish this game. I got up to 80 stars, and then gave up. 

4/10


## Super Mario Galaxy 2 (~2013)

This one is better. It's been a while since I've played both games, but I have decent memories of 2. Harder levels (read : less easy), ideas that I found engaging. The hub is even more useless, I can barely recall anything about it. It's not amazing. But there's some meat here. You're still guided from A to B, but it isn't a walk in some dead park. I felt some response. More time was invested on this one. I got to 122 stars or so, and then felt spent. Poor Luigi, never really got a chance to shine with me.

6/10


## Super Monkey Ball (~2007)

Slick, unforgiving. An unlikely setting. There may be some metaphor relating enslaved annoying monkeys in a ball and forcing them to do some tricky platforming and players subjecting themselves to a long but rewarding ordeal. Or between the monkeys and something else.

In any case, this game isn't messing around. If you want to beat it, you have to be good at it. Understand its collisions. The sensitivity of your control stick. 

I never beat it, but I sometimes ponder on whether I could have, had I given it the proper time and dedication. Besides its enjoyable gameplay, it's a test in patience. And in my case, a slight nostalgia for something I never got around to doing.

7/10


## Super Monkey Ball 2 (~2011)

This one doesn't feel as pure as the first one. You get buttons to control some moving parts' speed, or to pause them. It feels a little more random, the difficulty spikes feel rougher and sometimes less based on skill. This could all be my naive impression though, I didn't spend that much time on it.

It's functional, polished, the fun is still there. I don't care for it and appreciate it for what it is as deeply as the first one, though.

6/10 


## Pokemon Diamond (~2009)

The formula is starting to grow old. I can't even remember what the started Pokemons were like. I've grown, as well.

Beauty contests ? Eh ?

The caves were interesting. I liked roaming around hunting for fossils. 

There's a lot going on, it's been too long since I've played this to remember other noteworth details about the game clearly.

Except for one thing. What killed it for me. When you start a fight, there's a very slight delay before you can act. The menu is slighly less responsive than on Game Boy. 

This was incredibly frustrating. A few tenths of a second, every turn. This ruined it. Forget the rest. This made it unplayable for me.

3/10


## Super Monkey Ball Adventure (~2009)

I liked the premise, but the camera was annoying, the ball movement rather awkward in these environements, and the monkeys still irk me. 

I think you have to be dedicated if you want to play this game. I wasn't.

5/10


## Worms 3D (~2006)

Never played the 2D games.

This was fun. Not easy, catchy tunes and engaging gameplay, with some humour. The destructible environments made for a fun sandbox.

7/10


## Need For Speed Underground (~2006)

I'm not fond of racing games, mostly. The Burnout series are a partial exception.

The speed is there, but this didn't feel as good. And the tuning underground atmosphere with big enginges and people trying too hard to look cool didn't really do it for 12-year-old me.

4/10


## Pharaoh (~2001)

I remember playing this when I was 7 or 8, on a computer that could barely handle it and occasionally froze up for twenty seconds.

My first attempt was on normal mode. It was rough. I didn't have the resources to cater for other cities' requests, and they got upset with me. Part of my city burned down, and then a few dozen enemy soldiers finished me off. Easy mode throughout from then on.

My brother loved it, the slow patient building. Progression. Prosperity. I liked it all right, but was never into it as much. I haven't really played any city builder since.

6/10


## Neverwinter Nights 2 (~2009)

I have many good things to say about the first game, but not so many for this one. The level of zoom feels wrong, too close, generally. Visually, it's a bit harder to make things out. It ran slow on the machine I played, too. The main storyline didn't move me, either. I didn't get very far.

The heart of the game isn't the story though. It's the player-made content. I can't speak for that in this game.

5/10 


## The Walking Dead Season 1 (~2012)

I've never actually played this. I watched a Let's Play of the first two or three episodes a few years ago, dunno why I did this. 

There's some atmosphere and some emotion to this game. Clementine feels somewhat real. This isn't common. 

But the game itself, eeeeeh. Fake player choice. Such-and-such will remember this. I don't like those 'Remember this' quotes. It's like admitting many of the choices you make are pointless. I'm fine with choices being pointless, but there's a disconnect when you arbitrarily are allowed to chose some things and not others. 

Some characters felt fake, or were forcefully made to conflict with the player for the sake of drama.

Ultimately, Clementine also felt somewhat off. I don't think children adjust to new places and the disappearance of their parents like that. Her tone and the way she responds don't change much throughout the episodes I watched, and that started bugging me after a while. Still, she's a step forward. The rest of the game feels like a step in the wrong direction.

3/10


## Pyjama Sam 2 (~2000)

It's just like the first one, which I review elsewhere, pretty much. Not quite as mysterious and puzzling, though, and that probably was important for 7-year old me.

6/10


## Spelunky (~2013)

This was so addictive. Only ever played the free version. This sense of steady improvement and expanding understanding. The music, catchy but also not-quite-frantic. The procedural generation, conveying a sense of both unfamiliarity and familiarity. Discovering new things after a dozen hours in. Being killed by things I might not have encountered in another run, which could have felt unfair, but really I should have seen it coming. It was my fault. I was cocky.

I stopped before getting too lost into it, and I'm probably better off, because you can get lost for quite a while.

7/10


## The Void (~2014)

There's a game with a soul. A constant sense of mystery, a world and rules that are hard to wrap your head around. Disquieting presences, colour and darkness. Stunning environements. But you don't belong here. You need to remember that. You can't stay here. You don't belong. You're intruding.

The Void speaks to the player. It speaks through its setting. Its characters and hierarchy. Its colours. Through its gameplay. You slowly understand. You baulk at the fact that you inadvertently worked yourself into a impossible quagmire. The rules are unforgiving, and ignorance was not an excuse.

I need to get back to this. Someday.

9/10


## Sacrifice (~2013)

I could never really get into this. I think I might not have tried hard enough though.

This is one of those odd games that the early 2000s were rife with. How did people think this would sell ? The setting is unusual, so's the hybrid gameplay. It's hard to feel any sense of purpose.

I'm glad games like this exist. Perhaps I'll try harder some other time.

5/10


## To the Moon (~2014)

Ugh.

There's some atmosphere to this. I was saddened, dismayed. There's a sense of unfulfilment, regret. Remorse. A life partially squandered.

But the more I played this game, the more it bothered me. Why are the protagonists OK with what they're doing ? 

Why does the game think resetting someone's past, their life-defining relationship is a good thing ? The music, the writing, everything is telling me with far too much goading to cry or to feel happy about what they're doing.

No. 

I disagree with what the game wants me to think. What it wants me to feel. It's wrong.

This game was interesting to me though, perhaps especially so because I don't like it. 

Get lost in it, agree with the premise it tries to sell and you'll be teary-eyed and breathe and weep along with the maudlin tracks and (way too forced) gushingness. If you don't, you'll feel disconnected as I was.

3/10


## Limbo (~2013)

I remember mostly the frustration. Failed jumps, a sequence I misunderstood and wasted an hour and many deaths on, surprise enemies that almost certainly will kill you the first time around...

Puzzles that make no sense. Why is the factory so random ? Am I supposed to believe in this ? If this is supposed to be somewhat abstract, it doesn't feel like a dream to me.

You make progress, move forward, traverse different environments, but what is this all about ? Why put that kid through so much suffering ?

How deep is this game, really ? I couldn't say. It never really got me thinking. Too focused on the frustrating gameplay, perhaps. It never felt very evocative, nor very thought-provoking. None of it seemed to say very much.

I slogged through it back then, but I'm pretty sure I would give up very quickly on it now.

3/10


## Fez (~2015)

Atmosphere, a world you help rebuild, with gameplay that makes you endeavour to understand it from every possible angle. Fez doesn't quite feel like a long journey, and the sense of purpose the premise tries to instil within me didn't really last. 

But I was sensitive to its charm. I played it in 2014, so sometimes after all the drama, and I loved it then. Now, however, I feel like there's something missing. Can't quite put my finger on it.

7/10


## The Stanley Parable (~2015)

The more I think back to this game, the more condescending it feels. It's even in the title. Parable. The constantly-nattering smug narrator, the self-praise. I feel like I'm supposed to be admiring this game's creator's intellect. I don't. This isn't the most interesting meta game I've played. There's got to be more to that trope than this. I hope so, anyway, I'd be pretty disappointed if it weren't the case.

3/10


## Super Hexagon (~2014)

Epileptic, psychedelic, frantic flow. Video games don't get much purer than this.

The menus are really fast. You want to get back into it ? It's almost instantaneous. They're straight-to-the-point, as well. No unnecessary extra stuff tacked-on. It's all about the raw experience.

I never finished it, but I didn't want to spend a few days or weeks doing nothing else back then. I don't know if I ever will, but the flashes, the music, the 'Game Over. Begin' loops... I don't think I'll forget this state of semi-consciousness anytime soon.

8/10


## Rayman Origins (~2014)

Cute, and with some nice music, but it feels a lot more restrictive than the first three games. I don't feel the sense of discovery I did for those games.

There's not much to look at when you stop moving. The game wants you to keep going, it tries to feel very smooth. The Rayman universe, still hard to grasp after several very different games, feels pretty shallow here.

Perhaps my biggest gripe with this game is that it feels too smooth. You run along set paths in almost in Sonic-the-Hedgehog-fashion, and pick up collectibles when you walk off them. You don't make your own progress, the game's helping you along far too much for that.

Oh, interestingly, Jed Pressgrove mentions [something similar about Rayman Legends](https://gamebias.wordpress.com/2018/04/04/biased-notes-vol-2-rayman-legends/). 

5/10


## Rayman 2 : The Great Escape (~2003)

I've had CD issues with this game, and now have trouble running it on a modern system, so have never been able to complete it.

It has a great opening. You feel the hopelessness, and the desperation. This wears off quickly, but levels still feel cold, and harsh. Some sequences feel very surreal, unsettling, even.

I remember a room with pillars everywhere, and a confusing enemy I couldn't hit since he kept perfectly dodging my attacks by strafing around the pillars. A rather original and memorable fleeting encounter in what feels like a long epic, with character.

8/10


## Mario Kart Wii (~2011)

Never liked that series. I get bored pretty quickly. If I'd played it more often with friends it might have been slightly different.

This one, though, wow. My only fond memory of it was when my mother tried to play it after the plastic steering wheel had sparked her curiosity. It felt nothing like actual driving to her and I remember her laughing her socks off while struggling to finish a race.

This game lacks oomph. It feels slow, tracks are very large, the scenery looks too smooth. I was almost instantly bored. Apart from the occasional (and pleasant enough) session with a few friends, I have no wish whatsoever to play this game.

This sold 37 MILLION COPIES ?!? Holy Baloney.

3/10


## Mario Kart DS (~2010)

I didn't own this one.

I played it with a few friends, and it felt more fun to me. Battle mode was nice. It's been a while though.

5/10


## Mario Kart : Double Dash (~2010)

See above. I'm not enough of a Mario Kart player to care to compare the minor differences between the games.

5/10

## Warcraft 3 : Reign of Chaos (~2014)

The universe has its appeal, and the fact that the engine is laid bare for you to build stories with is appreciated, but I don't like the pacing. I couldn't really get into it.

5/10


## Wario Ware : Smooth Moves (~2009)

Creative use of the Wiimote, but I played it for 3 hours, finished it and never played it again. I've no idea what multiplayer is like, I wish the Wii had come bundled with more remotes in the default package. I'd have played it with my siblings, and might have simply played games with them more.

Oh yeah, that's one thing that pissed me off about the Wii. 60-euro controllers, and the price never dropped. 

Anyway.

5/10


## Rayman 3 : Hoodlum Havoc (GC) (~2008)

This feels very different to its predecessor. The world is vibrant with life and colour. It feels warm. Rayman is cruising through. You don't feel lonely, Globox is with you most of the time.

The game has some charm and humour. The soundtrack is incredibly varied, there's some harpsicord, some didgeridoo, some funk, some stressful horror ambient. Frantic violins, soothing xylophones. It's long, too, there's about 8 hours of music here. It's a soundtrack worth listening to, I'd say.

It doesn't feel desperate and bleak the way 2 does. This one is light-spirited, uplifting, even. The level boundaries sometimes feel a bit more present. 

It's an enjoyable romp, with some very nice sights, and a little variety. And a really good soundtrack

8/10


## Rayman 3 : Hoodlum Havoc (GBA) (~2011)

This one is odd. Its setting more closely resembles 2 than 3. It's alright, I don't remember much about it. 

5/10
 
 
## Doodle Jump (mobile) (~2011)

It felt addictive at first. Competing with a few friends was the fun part. The game itself, not so much, really.

3/10


## Temple Run (mobile) (~2011)

All things considered, I think I'd rather just read or doze, when I'm in the subway. Aiming for high-score in this kind of game seems even more pointless than usual to me. No sense of accomplishment, the grind is not enjoyable. I don't like killing time this way.

2/10


## Fruit Ninja (mobile) (~2012)

Mobile games like this are not my cup of tea.

2/10


## Joypack Joyride (mobile) (~2012)

Same as the above, but a little more fun. Also, a little more free-to-play.

3/10


## Final Fantasy IV (~2008)

This game sucked me in when I was 13 or 14. I played it to death for about 30 hours, got to the final chunk of the game, and more or less stopped there without completing it. I can't remember why.

Even though I was really into the story initially, I think I slowly got bored of the grinding, and the plot is somewhat naive and not all that deep.

I've not played an FF game since. I'm not sure I'd enjoy them all that much.

6/10


## Ghost Trick : Phantom Detective

I enjoyed the Phoenix Wright series a lot, but this is more naive, and the writing is occasionally poor. The setting isn't really fleshed out, and tutorials and dialogs hold your hand a little too much.

5/10


## Wario Ware Do It Yourself

This game couldn't quite make up its mind. Be a full-fledged Wario Ware game, with loads of microgames with very different directions, or be a fully moddable Wario Ware game.

Almost all the microgames the game provides were created with the provided toolkit, meaning they feel slightly more limited than previous iterations probably do. And your storage space and tools aren't that flexible.

But then again, would I have noticed if the game hadn't made this much easier for me to notice ?

The engine allows for some fun ideas. It's limited, but hey, Nintendo made a decent enough game out of it. I actually made some a few good microgames, I should have another look at them sometime, I've completely forgotten what they were like.

If you want to know more about game development, this provides an interesting introduction to some of the concepts, from a 2D devoid-of-programming engine perspective. It probably used to be even better in that respect, given the microgame online sharing system, but I've no idea what that was like.

7/10


## Scribblenauts

Such a juicy and promising concept. Scribble someting down, and it'll be summoned into existence. Dragons ? Angels ? God ? Yup.

It's a shame some of the puzzles get repetitive, and some items are pretty big silver bullets. It's also really messy and fiddly. And probably, given its scope, too culturally biased. It'd need content from more diverse people.

Interactivity is also limited. This would be the next big step... A more complex faction system, physics engine and action tree would make for an amazing game, I think. Imagine if you could recreate ecosystems, and see how wacky and out-of-balance they end up because you included a couple of creatures that don't belong.

I believe in this idea. I had fun with Scribblenauts. I don't think the sequels went much further with it though, which is quite a shame.

7/10


## Professor Layton and the Curious Village (~2010)

The naive story and shallow characters are cute, the animation is very pretty, the music quiet and relaxed (too much accordion for my taste though). Decent puzzles.

This is one of very few games my father has played. He likes puzzles, I can't remember what he made of the story though.

It loses focus after a while, and the naivety started to wear the charm off. The puzzles don't betray you, though..

Ultimately, this is a little like an episode of a children's television program with puzzles. There's a plot, everything's all right at the end, you forget about it very quickly and wait for the next one. 

I didn't watch television when I was a wee lad, and didn't warm to the story that much. But perhaps you did and could.

I think Puzzle Agent, though its puzzles were less varied, had a much more interesting atmosphere. It's creepy, gruesome, even. 

(Note : I briefly tried the sequel out and got very quickly bored. Can't remember whether my father did)

5/10


## Boom Blox (~2011)

Various variants of Jenga-like tower-building/smashing. Mildly interesting use of the Wii Remote.

Fun, but the colours and exaggerated enthusiasm of the game started irking me. It's a bit too noisy. I guess it's alright, but maybe you should just go play Jenga ? I don't think this is quite as fun, even with others, nor as imaginative as the real thing.

Wait, Spielberg produced this ? Huh.

5/10


## Super Smash Brothers Brawl (~2009)

This was great fun. Whether alone or with friends. Plenty of things to keep a jittery excitable teen happy.

A few years later, I played this again with a couple of other friends, all of us in our early 20s, and again, tons of fun. Messy fights, unexpected interactions, and some skill differentials all thrown in together.

And no DLC, no odd HD colours and gloss, no uncanny valley textures, ... New characters mostly don't feel like they're here to promote some new game, but are simply natural or amusing additions to the roster. It doesn't feel like rehashed content. It feels both new and familiar.

The magic has probably worn off somewhat since then, though.

7/10


## Ratatouille (Wii) (~2010)

This was given by my parents as a present to one of my sisters. I don't think she finished it. Could it partly have been because I played it too ? Fuck. I have several memories like these. Maybe I'm thinking too deply about this, but hmm... I wonder...

Anyway, this was a decent movie tie-in, though that's not saying too much. Levels play around with scale. The sewers are mostly scaled to the rats' size, but the kitchen and outdoors are human-sized. I liked that.

Some surreal levels with food floating around, too. This could have been a lot worse.

5/10


## Tribes Ascend

I only briefly played this, but it was appealing.

The speed, the smooth sliding, the impressive scale of each area. The skill required to manoeuver around. Shooting is not trvial in this game. It's very hard. You need to be good at this to have fun.

I think this one was criticised for changing some things compared to the first three games. I wouldn't mind another go at them, anyway. Or to talk about it with people who've played it. I'm sure they'd have praise for the game.


## Kingdom Rush (flash) (~2011)

A cute tower defense game. Part of the content is locked behind a paywall. I don't think I agree with that way of doing this.


## Hexagon

Play Super Hexagon instead. This is where it all started, but SH is where it's at.


## Superbrothers: Sword & Sworcery EP (~2014)

I've not finished this one.

The atmosphere is exceptional. In large part due to the soundtrack. This is another soundtrack worth listening to, I think.
It has soul, and stands out.

The characters, storyline and meta dialog convey something about the world, but the attempts at humour sometimes fell flat for me.

The gameplay is interesting, but required me to do something I found slightly tedious. I didn't understand all of the rules though and probably didn't try hard enough, so I don't know how much of the blame lies with me.

7/10

## Antichamber (~2014)

Some of the points raised by critics seem very valid to me. There's something unfinished about the game. And the philosophical non-euclidian fun at the beginning gets replaced by gun puzzles, marking a shift in focus. You might not like both chunks equally.

Still, this was rather thought-provoking. I occasionally paused and pondered about things. The puzzles were clever, as well, at least from what I can remember. 

8/10


## Kairo (~2014)

A puzzle game with no explicit narrative. You can infer what happened from little details you might notice. 

I didn't notice much, and couldn't make sense of some of the puzzles. I needed help for this one.

The environments are intriguing, but Kairo simply didn't do it for me. I simply passed through them unmoved, and unaware that there was more to it. I blame generic AAA game level design for this. But even if I were aware of the underlying narrative waiting to be uncovered, I don't know whether I would have bothered. If you can, you may really like this. I think I rushed through this. I didn't take my time.

Joel Goodwin did bother, and did take his time. He wrote about this game [at length](http://www.electrondance.com/the-secret-of-kairo/) on his website Electron Dance, and gives his interpretation of what he thinks happened. I think reading his article is more fun than piecing things together would have been for me. 

5/10


## Robot Unicorn Attacks (~2011 ?)

There's a lot more to life than robot unicorns and clones of whatever Canabalt was a clone of.

3/10


## Battleblock Theater (~2014)

This game is funny. I love the narrator's voice, the upbeat, goofy, sometimes nonsensical music. The gameplay is nothing to write home about, but the silly cheerful atmosphere is refreshing. I never got that far. Might try coop one day.

6/10


## Portal (~2014)

I think starting the game while knowing too much about the story makes the experience a lot blander. Original as this may have been, I didn't really have any lasting impressions about the game. I wasn't very interested in what GLaDoS had to say at the start, nor in what she had to say afterwards.

5/10


## Braid (~2014)

I liked the puzzles. The time-rewinding mechanic is fascinating. The story I remember nothing about. I didn't get what the game was about, I was probably a little naive and didn't expect narration to be this obtuse, at the time.

I feel like there's something missing about this game. I enjoyed it a lot, but I can't quite put my finger on it. I also have a similar gripe with The Witness, funnily enough.

8/10

## Exit Path
## Kirby's Air Ride
## Sonic Adventure 2 : Battle
## Burnout 1, 2 and Legends

I might talk more about the Burnout series some other time. I need to upload a piece about Paradise's soulless fake open-world. Or maybe I'll talk about the other games here. Dunno yet.

## etc.

// TODO add link to reviews