---
layout: post
title: "Deus Ex Review"
published: true
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

Deus Ex.

I'd heard some good about it, knew it blended genres, and that efforts were made so that the player could have some freedom to explore.

It's amazing how little I knew about some genres of video games as little as five years ago. I really knew very little about first-person shooters or action games. I still don't know that much.

<!--more-->

Note : The game came out in 2000, if you want to get it running on a modern machine, it may be a little capricious. I didn't notice it straight away, but the game was much darker than it was supposed to be at first. I found an alternate launcher that fixed those issues.

The boxart looks halfway between Terminator and The Matrix. And indeed, the trenchcoats and sunglasses makes me think the devs watched those films (and Dark City, perhaps ?) a little too much.

The game looks and sometimes is slightly cheesy. The dated graphics and atmosphere are part of it. The voice acting is at times rather corny, some accent attempts are poor imitations of the real thing. Some characters and places are clichés of the real thing, though not to the point where it distracts from the game's main focus. Everyone has five-letter passwords for their computers.

This is one of the first games with some basic lipsynch too, I believe.

The soundtrack was overall nice, but didn't stay with me, and a couple of tracks could have been used a little less, perhaps. It's mostly atmospheric ambient. That being said (I'd completely forgotten about this, and didn't notice it when going through the game a second time), any conversation that's not a one-liner (ie that changes the camera angles) also resets the music.

The AI is... Hmm. It's dated, but even for a 2000 game was flawed at times. I think it wasn't as polished as the devs would have liked, if I remember the postmortem I read a couple of years after playing this. The novel and experimental aspects of this game probably didn't help, either. NPCs are good at some things, but the AI is exploitable.

What really appealed to me in Deus Ex, was how the game wanted to create a believable setting and provide the player with choices that arise naturally and consistently within the game.

I sometimes made decisions without even realising they were 'decisions'. Sometimes I noticed it later on, sometimes through replaying the game, sometimes by reading up on it. Some of these choices are made through *gameplay*, some through dialog.

As basic as this sounds, it's so gratifying. Deus Ex doesn't patronise me. It doesn't throw its choices in my face with jarring A, B, C dialog with widely inconsistent responses (much realism, very immersion). It doesn't constrain the plot around forced dramatic choices that "aren't black and white".

Here, the choices may matter, or they may not. You can stop and think about them, or you can play through the whole game without noticing much.

You don't control all the consequences or know everything about them. You'll feel some of them, others you won't. You don't know if and when they 'matter'. How important they are to you often solely depends on what you, the player, value them. Not on what the game tells you (it doesn't tell you anything).

Goodness. This is such a breath of fresh air. This makes me feel like such a natural part of the Deus Ex world. I'm still controlling a character with his own identity and personality, but the immersion is deep. It's very deep.

There's no silly little Steam achievement to pull you out of the game at the wrong moment, either.

Another reason why I felt so free in this game was that I never felt levels' boundaries. I sometimes saw them, late into the game when I could make huge leaps, but never felt like I was running into an invisible wall or a designer gotcha.

The gameplay also allows gives you some leeway, and the level design suits it very cleanly. Some chunks of the game are very open, with room to manoeuver, explore, ask around, and plan. Think, and make decisions. Or run in all guns blazing, if you feel like it.

The gadgets, weapons, *level design*, cybernetic powers, and the way the game responds to your actions mean you have several very different approaches to many situations.

Depending on how you decide to play (weapons vs movement powers vs stealth), the game does *feel* very different.

Again, this might seem basic. It isn't. People like to think more recent games provide you with more choice, and more freedom to build your character, and more complex playing grounds giving you more potential solutions to problems.

I've mentioned how I feel about choice already (Deus Ex handles this, not perfectly, but way, way, way better than the likes of Walking Dead, Life Is Strange, The Witcher series, ...). 

In terms of character-building and complex scenarios, I think Errant Signal [raises some good points in a video about Fallout 4](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WqkZXNZwZq4), about how seldom-mentioned 'dumbing-down' in some AAA series has made complex situations *feel* less different, and less flexible than in past games.

I've not played the Fallout games, but I agree with the general sentiment. I felt like I had much more freedom and was far more immersed in Thief : The Dark Project than in Dishonored. What I know of the subsequent Deus Ex games seems to lean in the Fallout 4 direction (and that's part of the reason why I probably won't play them, see further for more on this). 

This first game though, it's more on the Fallout 1/2 and Vampire : The Masquerade : Bloodlines side of things. It's not the deepest, but different gameplay decisions are and *feel* different. And again, this is gratifying without seeming forced or patronising. Or even empowering, if you decide to play a fragile and peaceful character.

I'm baffled by how many things this game got right, and by how few are implemented in more recent AAA games. This felt like a big step in the right direction, or a pretty good one, at the very least.

For all its minor issues, its corniness, its sometimes odd pacing, its sometimes puzzling story, its lockpicks you could find in random crates, its limited AI, its NPCs walking about idly, this game got something fundamental right. 

It feels natural. I got lost in that universe. Twice. Such a breath of fresh air. Again, this is a step in what I believe to be a good direction for videogames.

This is a significant game. 

The story is actually deeper than I initially gave it credit for, too. I don't feel like discussing it here. But it is worth discussing. It broaches quite a few topics.

9/10

Ross from Ross's Game Dungeon [talks more about it](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rxOKEsBx4NU). He discusses the first three games in the series at length. [2](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pPwpLDvAnvo) and [3](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vYLEuQrvND0) don't seem to exude the player freedom the first one does. In any case, his videos are worth checking out.

Errant Signal also [discusses the game at length](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UN1GJLBM8Wc), both in terms of its mechanics and story.