---
layout: post
title: "Red Barrels, Red Barrels everywhere"
published: true
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

I played Half-Life 2 in 2015. The strong impression the first one had left with me hadn't quite subsided yet. I can't remember what my expectations were, but this game was showered with so much praise Gabe Newell drowned, or so I've heard. (Or maybe those people wished he had ? I'm sorry, I'm at a loss here).

<!--more-->

Anyway, it was hailed as top GOTY of the decade.

I have to say, I do like the graphics. Again, there's something about the pre-HD days where colours looked right to me, and lighting didn't feel generic and off. I don't know what it is, but there's a difference. Perhaps the fact engines were more diverse and less samey and streamlined meant level design and graphics had more variety to them in the little details. Dunno.

Anyway, you get the picture.

There's a lot of talking. People guiding you all over the place. Alyx, feeling disquietened by Gordon's incomprehensible lack of speech (as far as we've been told, he isn't mute, nor deaf), speaks in his stead. You do nothing, and she tells you she's your friend. This is perhaps a little touching to some, but I don't like it very much. It feels like Valve had something in mind here.

Not much music though. Only from time to time, to emphasise some dramatic setpiece. I've mixed feelings about this. Sometimes it worked all right, but occasionally I ended up thinking 'hey, the game just started playing music randomly', which probably wasn't the desired effect. The absence of music throughout the rest of the game was appropriate enough. The game feels eery and lonely at times, its heavy silence only interrupted by gunfire and other hostile sounds.

The main gripe I have with this game, though, is all those blasted explosive red barrels lying around everywhere.

What are they doing in the middle of nowhere, or right next to a group of enemies ? No idea. Maybe Valve confused them with some form of natural wildlife, growing everywhere it can.

It's absurd. Other games do this, too, but Half-life goes way overboard with this idea.

The level design is built around the concept that the player will keep pressing onwards. Without stopping to look at things. The first entry wasn't quite like this. Sometimes you had to retrace our steps, look for a path forward, and perhaps breathe a little before some action sequence. Half-Life 2, outside of closed areas with gabbling NPCs, mostly explicitely wants you to keep going without fail.

NPCs start whining and keep asking you to get moving. Sometimes, infinite waves of enemies discourage you from hanging around areas you thought you'd cleared. You don't have any option of going for stealth, either, an opportunity HL1 occasionally provided.

So what happens when you do stop and look around ?

The answer is rather disappointing. The game is one long string of Hollywoodian  action setpieces. You know, the kind of unbelievably implausible sequences of events that just perfectly lineup to enable you to escape. The sort of bullshit you could find, in, say, a Transporter film, or the recent Hobbit stuff. James Bond action stuff.

The jetski sequence is a good example of this. Parts of the scenery collapse around you, you make it past a gate that snaps shut only seconds afterwards. You make all the right turns and convenient jumps, making your getaway possible only by the skin of your teeth.

I understand the wish to entertain, and some of these sequences were impressive, but it simply doesn't work for me.

HL1 also was an unlikely epic adventure, with, when you stop to think about it, nonsensical architecture. But Gordon wasn't really being told what to do, he more or less stumbled along with very little understanding of what had happened, until things stopped attacking him.

Action sequences were a lot less James-Bondey. There was a sense of dread and desperation to Freeman's actions. He felt fragile and vulnerable -at least at the start. None of that explosive barrels bullshit, or very little of it.

Again, if one stops and thinks about the layout of the camps the Resistance has set up (through several of which Freeman passes during the escape sequence), things look odd. The way they're sprinkled around is far more tailored to the expected player pacing than anything coherent.

This kind of level design also hampered my perception of the Portal Gun. It was immediately apparent to me that some chunks of the game were designed to encourage the player to use it, and are laid out in noticeably specific ways so as to avoid potential collision issues. This becomes a problem when I notice it in an area I haven't even really entered.

I thought the AI had some highlights, but there was something related to it I felt was off that I couldn't quite lay my finger on. I later came across [this video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OsDM7GKb0xU) by Joel Wintergreen which I feel pinpoints the problem better than I would have been able to articulate it.

(His videos in which he discusses level design tools are worth checking out, as well. I wonder if they might not relate to what I vaguely mentioned earlier about older games feeling less samey in terms of level architecture than some newer AAAs).

Anyway, yeah... I ended up getting the impression the Portal Gun was a toy for me to play around with, and that some of the areas' main purpose was to be the playground. Nothing else.

I never really got a sense of epic. I felt like I was being moved along, from one James Bond moment to the other, with lots of gabbling about aliens and stuff in between. I finished the game having learned little, cared even less, and shot thousands of faceless soldiers in the face. I'd been given several playthings to muck about with. I have a hard time taking a setting that tries to be grim seriously with such awkwardly sabotaged and predictable pacing.

Ultimately, I wish this hadn't been put on such a stupidly high pedestal. The blasted explosive barrels, the spaces that were turned into meaningless testing grounds for a trigger-happy player, awkwardly friendly Alyx, empowering weapon balancing and flawed AI, the action flick pacing, the pastiche... Those slowly poisoned the experience for me. 

I wish this hadn't become the staple that many other games tried to follow up on. I'm sick of explosive red barrels that serve no other purpose or meaning than to be shot at by the player.

4/10

Note : I played episodes 1 and 2 in 2016, you can find what I wrote about them elsewhere, once I've uploaded my notes about them.