---
layout: post
title: "You're a Witchereritchw, Geralt"
published: true
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

The Witcher : Enhanced Edition. Spoilers in the second half of this review.

<!--more-->

#Brief summary

Edition Enhanced STOP Pretty graphics STOP Uses an expanded version of the Aurora Engine STOP but not very well STOP No black/white choices, instead, comforming A/B choices STOP Camera and UI issues STOP Much backtracking STOP Lots of nice ideas, most have implementation issues STOP Sex is used as a cheap reward STOP Crashes, bugs, script issues STOP Story, main char and setting are interesting STOP But dialogues and narration simplistic STOP THat said, still intriguing enough that I'll give 2 a try STOP

I think the game's ok, but could have been much better without asking too much of it. 

Anyway.

##Let's get started

#Vague context, general info 'bout the game

It's an A-RPG that draws inspiration from a series of Polish novels. I haven't read them.

Here's one good point. I played the Enhanced Edition. It came out a year after the original game. It changed quite a few things apparently (NPC routines, inventory, reduced loading times, improved menus), fixed bugs, added extra content (soundtrack, a few extra mini-adventures, a digitalised comic book, a more easily accessible game engine, making of clips).

I appreciate that this content was free for those having bought the original non-enhanced version. I like that move on CD Projekt's part. They care about their players.

Oh yeah, and I needed to do a little something to play the game with high-quality textures. Can't remember what, but it was a quick fix.

The game is based on the Aurora Engine, Neverwinter's Nights engine (sold with the game, with which players could -and still do- create their own adventures). There are a few similarities in the level design (zones with loading times), but The Witcher tones it down in scale and size, for the benefit of more complex areas with less repetitivity in the scenery. NWN came out in 2002, its extensions in 2003-2004, and its last developer patch in 2006 (more recent player patches have come out since). The Witcher came out in 2007, Enchanced Edition in 2008.

The game reuses many of the tools that control AI behaviour, a lot of the UI (inventory, journal, conversation system, ...). More on that later.

#Aesthetically speaking

The game is quite pretty. I hadn't played many aitch dee games by that point, so this 2008 game I played in 2016 with max graphics looked quite impressive to me. Pretty textures, neat special effects, day/night cycle and weather that look convincing, water makes you wet, ...

There's a glaring lack of variety in the character models, however. Apart from the twenty or thirty or so major characters, the dozens of other NPCs only use about twenty models, meaning they repeat way too often. It's a bit offputting.

Animation also isn't quite up to par. Character arms go through robes, hair through their shoulders. Some of the cutscenes made me laugh with all the woollen stiff and unnatural animations. It's mostly alright, but Geralt is rigid, and his face remains expressionless even though he pirouets everywere in combat. He doesn't smile, doesn't get angry (except, oddly enough, in the opening and closing cutscenes), and neither does most of the cast. I guess that put pressure on the voice actors, and heh, they did what they could, but it's hard for the characters to convey much emotion.

#Sound, uh, soundaristically speaking... ?

I mentioned the voices, let's talk about the sound. The music is alright, certainly not memorable. A couple were noteworthy, others were annoying... Unfortunately, the small and few areas mean you'll get to listen to the same several tracks quite a lot. More on that later.

The voice acting is functional. A bad French accent made me chuckle. I'm alright with average voice acting considering this is a Polish game. I do feel characters speak too slowly (a bit like in the Metal Gear Solid games), which prompted me to zip through dialogs by reading the subtitles. I occasionally missed little bits of useful information by skipping through text too fast, and there's no chat log (NWN had one, and that menu would have been welcome here).

A few typos, too. Nothing too bad.

#Userinterfacely speaking

The game crashed six times during my thirty or so hours of play. Random, unpredictable crashes, not something I could workaround. A little unexpected for a 'Definitive Edition', especially considering NWN is very stable in its latest builds. 

The camera was a little annoying. There are three camera modes (far away, less far away, and shoulder camera). None of them were to my satisfaction. Far away was too far, the close one was very sensitive, the compromising one sometimes messed up. All three of them occasionally made it awkward to use a mouse for movement. 

Actually, if you click on an interactive item (enemy, NPC, chest, ...), Geralt automatically performs his default action for said item. The problem is that the collision boxes for clicks are a little larger than the item itself. I've occasionally rushed to open some chest when I simply wanted to walk past it and avoid some enemy. Combined with occasional camera quirks, it can become rather irritating.

Many interface design choices left me wondering a little, as well. Especially the menus.

The inventory is tiny. I mean, sure, Geralt didn't bother bringing a backpack, and I can see that he's carrying his swords on his back, so he can't romp around with twenty of them, but why can I only use one light weapon ? Why can I hobble along with two steel swords, but only one silever one ? Why can inventory slots hold 25+ potion/bomb ingredients of the same type, but only 10 diaonds ? If the inventory space is so limited, why does each little contract for a sidequest take up a slot but main plot items don't ?

The dialog system is very close to NWN's. There are occasional choices during convesations, or occasional available actions (give gift, bribe, etc.). However, very often, some dialog choice will quickly end the conversation, and you'll need to start a convesation up with the NPC again to discuss other topics.

This might seem trivial, or nitpicky, but NWN simply didn't have these issues. Some NPCs also start an animation immediately after their conversation ends (those we raised from bed go back to sleep), animation during which one cannot interact with them. This dialog choice that led to an unexpected premature end of conversation inadvertently subjects the player to two to eight seconds of unskippable pointless animation. A frustrating detail that makes discussion with some NPCs very cumbersome. A shame, and that was likely an easy fix.

Similarly, Geralt sheathes his weapon without prompt after some time out of combat, and also does so at the start of each cutscene. This is mostly inconsequent, but occasionally, he'll put his sword away only to be sprung upon by a new enemy that very same moment that I'd seen coming, leaving the dumb witcher vulnerable and unprepared for several seconds. 

#Day/Night cycle, quests

There's a day/night cycle, and it's not just additional tacked-on bells and whistles. Some creatures only spawn during nighttime, and NPCs have a busy daily life : most of them sleep at night, wake up at dawn, potter about, chop some wood, go drink at the tavern... Some characters meet up at a certain hour of the day, too. It affects quests as well, since you need to look for people and know where they'll be depending on the time of the day.

This means you have to know the world a little. Pay some attention to it. People aren't going to stay up all night for you, who do you think you are ? You're a witcher, piss off. 

The system is very interesting, and overall very well thought out, outside of two specific details.

The first is that, most of the time, only the time of day matters, and not the actual day itself. You can bum around for a week and then come back at midday to complete a quest. An understandable compromise, given that doing things another way might have been very awkward for players. However, there's one quest that requires -without notice- Geralt to act immediately, and not doing so will cause it to fail. That happened to me, and I wasn't happy about it. Why change the game's rules in such a way without warning ? Perhaps I missed some hints, but even so, this is debatable game design.

The second issue is that to speed up time, you need to rest. You can rest by chatting with some characters, or by finding a campfire. My gripe with that is that it lead to a boatload of backtracking to the nearest resting spots. You also need to rest to upgrade your skills, brew potions, bombs and oils. This wouldn't be such an issue if the NPCs that have the Power To Put You To Sleep weren't so spread out. Chapters 2 and 3 were particularly annoying in that regard... In one of the zones, those NPCs are all indoors (ie loading time required), and the campfire is at a noticeable distance from where things are happening. Another zone has no campfire, only loading times.

Couldn't Geralt have bought a tent, been able to select safe spots ? Is he so dependent on resting in front of a fire that he can't be more than a day away from a village ? Couldn't he make campsites and secure locations himself ? In NWN, you can rest when no enemy is nearby...

Quests unfold in sometimes puzzling ways. You might have to discuss with NPS in a specific, not-necessarily-natural-or-intuitive order, to cause some events to happen. I occasionally meandered and idled about without a clear idea of what I was supposed to do, or backtracked because I'd struck a conversation with a character earlier than I was supposed to and was meant to proceed differently.

NWN (I keep getting back to this game, but I'll justify why further down) might be chopped up into more zones, with consequently slightly more numerous loading times (and slightly longer, too), but backtracking is far less prevalent. Its level design philosophy is different. In The Witcher, pleasant music looped over and over after spending too much time in the same zone becomes a little tedious.

The limited inventory space and clunky quest system also artificially cause extra backtracking. The game became a lot less fun after a while. It's long, but a good chunk of that is walking back and forth from danger areas and resting.

These are all design issues that aren't too hard to solve, either.

#Combat, improving ur W1tch3r 5k1llz, difficulty

Oh, I haven't discussed combat... It's, it's alright. It wasn't memorable for me, but the system based on timing, chaining attacks together, dodging, changing combat mode, it's functional. The only thing that frustrated me was that some dodges might not succeed when performed too close to an obstacle, and the animation and timing misstep aren't intuitive. Perhaps that one's on me though, unsure about that (2019 edit : it's been a while now, I don't remember any of this).

The game is not very difficult. I almost never bothered to dodge or drink potions (even though they are a notable component of the game). Apart from two or three fights near the end, well, uuuuh, you could mash buttons, even in normal mode. It's inconsistent, however. Some enemies wrecked me when I didn't combo them properly and had little XP to give, others were wusses, died after three fireballs (*Three* ! Hah !) and rewarded me with much more ecks pee. A possible consequence of the way I upgraded my skills or the way I progressed within the game ?

Oh, ugh, something I didn't really like. Some zones you'll need to go to during both chapters 2 and 3. After progressing to chapter 3, new and more powerful creatures pop up here and there. The game tries to justify this, but it felt like an extremely forced and artifical gameplay-serving explanation rather than one consistent with plot or universe.

The upgrade system does seem to steer off the beaten path a little. Some skills are upgradable (group combat, spell casting, ...), but there are three distinct upgrade levels (bronze, silver, gold), which means you have to spread the upgrades around a little and can't become an unstoppable specialised cheap one-trickpony early on (you don't get many gold upgrades, and few early on). Not a bad idea. That being said, there wasn't too much variety to combat. Fight with a few weapons, cast a spell (five available ones), and that's about it.

A few minigames, too. Some alright poker dice, and some tavern fisticuffs (that resemble normal combat).

#Artificiel intelligance

I mentioned the city was brimming with life and the NPCs were busybodies. It's all well and good, and more advanced than in NWN (with far more diverse idle animations, notably). But some NWN modules (player-made adventures) had done a lot more with this, more and far better, which admittedly isn't easy. But in this here game, there are very few ways to interact with the environment (attack/talk/open chest, and that's about it). It feels a little empty. And apart from the occasional juggler that pirouets and whom people applaud, it's rather mundane. This city is lively, but pretty tame.

And yeah, being able to understand the way the engine works a little bit emant I was less impressed. Lone module devs were able to come up with far more intricate factions and city life. In A Dance With Rogues, you can't use lockpicks or break doors open in front of guards, or make too much noise. You can't draw your weapon or walk about naked in public. Every house has a number and is part of a street, there's a huge sense of consistency and believability to the world. The Witcher does not reach these heights, unfortunately (and has a couple more related issues I'll talk about further on), but it tried a little.

The AI for combat, on the other hand, is rather basic and dumb. Ennemies run at Geralt if they spawn near him or he gets too close. And that's it. No alert given to companions, they don't heal up or do the other few things earlier games did. Hey, let's run towards this very strong combat-savvy white-haired weirdo. I'm sure he'll be a pushover, even though he hunts massive monsters for a living. (To be fair, perhaps catching a Witcher offguard is a valid strategy, but I wasn't getting the impression from the way humans interacted with Geralt that that was their battle plan).

The pathfinding is much improved, on the other hand. Click anywhere you can see in front of you, and Geralt'll go there via a close-to-optimal path. It's very nice (and would be even more so without the clicking issue mentioned earlier).

##Entering spoiler territory

#Approximate summary

Let's talk about the story and setting, now...

Geralt = witcher. Weirdo mutant made powerful and monster-hunting-able through painful training. Made sterile, too. At the start of the game, other Witchers come across a wounded and amnesiac G, and help him recover.

Prologue =~ tutorial. Witcher secrets are stolen by nasty evil ugly mage, and some sort of predictable bespectacled assassin. The Witchers spread out to inverstigate. Geralt goes to Vizima, a, uh, a big city.

You investigate, get a little help, get involved in a conflict between Ze Ordeur of ze Flaming Rose, military fanatics, and non-humans. You're more or less compelled to make a few choices relating to those factions, that will impact later chapters.

Geralt finds the trail of the thieves, is temporarily booted out of the city and away from the going-ons, but returns to a blazing Vizima that's falling apart. Order knights and non-humans are whalloping each other quite hard.

We learn the thefts were part of a (gasp) conspiracy, and the thieves goals should they reach them would have big consequences (death of the king, amongst other things). We fight for to not thieves reach goal. It turns out Grammastah of the Order was the one stoking the flames of conflict, and in cliché dumm end annoying sequence, he says he see future, that mankind will die and that he was trying to prevent it all. Uh-huh. We chop him up.

That's, uh, the general scheme. Some of it is interesting, and the note on which the game ends leaves room for potential big improvements from the sequel in terms of plot.

#Frustration

Three core issues :

Choices you make, however not-black and not-white they may be, are no less arbitrary and constrained than in other games.

Dialogs, some characters' behaviour, some plot points are simplistic, and sometimes unnatural.

The game justifies quite a few things with some blatant bullshit, and some events and sequences are scarcely believable.


#Bullshit, inc.

Let's start with that one.

Something pissed me off quite strongly when I started to notice it.

Geralt, who can barely step over a low fence or steps, *jumps* during cutscenes. He does it at least twice to reach areas that are otherwise visible but inaccessible. Argh.

There's another sequence inovlving some werewolf. No one had mentioned him yet ingame, I believe. Geralt chases him around part of Vizima at nighttime, making masses of noise in the process, and not one soldier lifts a finger to see what's going on, no one opens their window, nope nope. And (part of issue number two), if you don't kill the creature, you can go talk to the human the next morning, and he has no new dialogue options to discuss the, uh, eventful night. You have to go talk to this lover. Why ? This werewolf's origin is never justified, never explained, either, when I feel it ought to have been. And the city doesn't give a shit about all of this.

Towards the end of the game, I was accompanied by a witch, Triss (a main character in the game, whom Geralt was on rather intimate terms with). She has a temper, a strong personality, is powerful, and has no qualms about keeping things from Geralt nor about manipulating him for her own ends. 

She occasionally justifies some events by magic bullshit. She's capapble of detecting magic sources quite fast, but seems to have been incapable of sniffing out the thieves' den that speedily, despite their use of a magic mirror for communication.

Well, right at the end of the game, right in front of the door of Big Evil Baddy Of Game, Geralt looks at her and says : 'Oh no, I've forgotten my potions. Well well well, isn't that a right old pickle.' Her answer ? 'Silly Geralt. Now now, what would thou do without a-me ? I'll go look for them, you silly sausage'. She walks away, leaving us free to fight the Big Baddy alone, like a naive idiot relying on plot armour rather than help and power to make it through.

Geralt, a solitary witcher with years of experience, having survived many dangers, forgets to bring his potions ??? And only thinks to mention it after hours spent with Triss clearing a path through a city torn apart by battle ??? Triss, the witch, who spends most of the game bossing Geralt around, relents and goes off to fetch them ???? Does she even know where she's going ?!!!?!?

Oh, and let's talk love relationships, since I'm mentioning Triss. In this game, love == sex, roughly. 

#Sex is meaningless

In its uncensored version, you get to goggle at naked dryads. Uh, sure, why not. Mature game and all that. You're occasionally given the opportunity to seduce a woman/female humanoid creature ; despite their expressionless faces, Witchers have charm. Those seduction scenes (which unlock erotic cards) are purely gratuitous. They add nothing to the story (with one minor exception), characters don't even talk about anything related afterwards. Fire and forget. Nothing. 

All ri-ight, I guess Geralt is a lone wolf with few emotions.

The gratuitous nature of sex here is a little more offputting. Some conversation are clumsy. Sex is a reward to some quests... This is debatable in and of itself (I'm not sure sex as a reward IRL often leads to the stablest of relationships), but it feels really pointless. I've seen way better ways of broaching the topic (again, in some older NWN modules). I'm not that thirsty of an angsty teenage fuckboy, and even if I were that's still poor (and perhaps slightly disrespectful) writing. I like to think I still have some dignity, you know ?

You must choose, Neo

Well, anyway, amongst all those women, there are two Women, with whom Geralt can start up a (supposedly) deeper and more lasting relationship. Triss the bullshit-spouting witch, and Shani the, uh, herbalist ? They've both met Geralt in the past. By deeper, I meant you get a few extra lines of bland dialog.

But the game forces a choice on Geralt at some point, by putting him in charge of some kid with slightly unstable magic powers, and being *forced* to choose a surrogate mother. You choose one, the other snaps at you and cuts ties off with you forever. 

This strikes me as odd and unnatural. Geralt doesn't even bother to explain his decision, the lady doesn't want to hear it. Despite years of acquaintanceship, despite rational reasons for the choice, and despite the fact Geralt isn't exactly the most present or reliable of companions, plodding off every now and then to spill some green blood. On top of that, the game wants you to make a ladies' man out of him.

If you uphold your relationship with the Chosen One (you only need to decide whether to be strict on the kid or not, it's so deep), she gives you a second erotic card, and then later on you exchange a couple of letters. Geralt expresses overflowing emotions through writing. I'd never have believed he felt all of that from his gestures.

Later on, the couple dreams of a normal life, and chat in a way that feels so completely removed from their position as sorceress and witcher. People don't talk like that, a lot of the time they *can't*. At no other point of the game do they let on they want to live a normal life, too, especially Geralt.

There's a little something here. Good intentions (the devs love pervades throughout the game). The idea wasn't unsound, but aaaaaaaaaaaargh. Mercy. It's so shoddy.

And if you thought that was perplexing, well, there's more.

I mentioned two factions. Witchers claim they're neutral, but you have the possibility to help them out here and there. The plot requires you to assist or be assisted by one of them several times.

I don't understand why it unfolds like this... Geralt has to give up his precious neutrality, but never discusses it. Never challenges it, never proactively seeks alternative. The elves are consumed by hatred, and the Order justifies its acts by, uh, can't remember but it probably wasn't very deep. A neutral witcher. The perfect arbiter, no ? Try and spark some dialogue, find some common ground, and try and save lives... ? Being involved, but remaining impartial to a certain extent ?

Eh, well, no. You don't get that choice. Geralt is not very resourceful. He lets things happen and consequently force choices upon him, rather than taking the initiative. Except when he has to catch them blasted thieves. He'll get off hit butt for that. 

This sacred neutrality thing is horsecrap. Sitting around doing nothing and waiting for conflict to heat up IS a stance. It's not 'neutral'. 

Furthermore, he's a mutant, he isn't quite 100% human, GMOs and all that. People don't trust him when he's not being sent to kill creatures, or when it would undermine the plot (but later on, the king entrusts Geralt with his daughter's life, for the second time).

Ok, maybe he's, you know, shy by nature, or brooding, and doesn't talk much. And amnesiac, sure. I'm ready to accept that he's not the warmest of human beings (and inexpressive, let's not forget that), and doesn't engage in idle banter. Why not.

But when he fails to justify major, world-impacting choices properly, or when he refuses to open his trap and tone conflict down, and the game never even considers that possibility, I find it odd.

The game presents you with a 'choice' between helping out one faction or the other. Help one out, and the other will resent your decision, and treat you with contempt. So profound. Instead of a black/white chocie, you get soemthing that's just as arbitrary. The consequences are unclear, why some alternate options aren't available is puzzling, some characters' reactions don't make much sense.

There is a 'neutral' path. You refuse to help one of the factions out, and stay 'neutral'. And then people critices your choice, and the depth of the plot is lauded by critics. This choice isn't explicit, but is very unnatural to make, since by that point you've helped both factions out a few times already.

Yeah, the way the plot unfolded, the bullshit, the pretend 'deep and meaningful' choices, they felt off. 

#Dialogs

They're simplistic, too short, and naive.

Once you've chatted with someone, unless the plot advances, they'll never have anything new to say. They only discuss what is useful, or useful for the plot. Book you can find or buy provide a little context and occasionally briefly delve into the Witcher universe. And that's it. Conversations are short and terse, and if you expect some character to have new things to say after some event of the plot, you can forget it. It doesn't happen.

There's a character called 'Gossip' in chapter 2 who'll tell you things about the city when prompted. I was hoping that she'd provide more information after I'd explored a little more, but nope. You can bang her though.

The main characters are all like that, too. It's a shame. I think it might be due to the fact that every single bit of dialog is dubbed (and perhaps the fact that this is translated from Polish means some dialog was lost). NWN only dubbed specific chunks, and teh writers could give the rest of it their all.

I believe six different people worked on the plot, but only two of them on the dialog. It shows.

It's getting very near the end.

I think I've said most of what I wanted to say.

#So, yeah...

The game is paved with good intentions.

And it has something, too. The atmosphere at the start is really good. It really feels like Geralt is in an odd place. The outskirts of Vizima aren't welcoming, and they aren't about Geralt. The game feels different, and I think that's partly because of the culture. It felt promising.

But it's an odd mix. It's bogged down by design decisions which don't appeal to me, marred by the choice of going for plot shortcuts.

I also think the direction the devs wanted to take the level design in wasn't in adequation with what the game engine is tailored to do.

#Why do you keep talking about that other damn game ?

I've made so many comparisons with NWN because I don't understand why they made these decisions that feel inferior to that game. Perhaps a lack of expertise with the engine ? Or is it me ? I don't know...

Neverwinter Nights is a D&D game. I wrote a review about it recently. Its rules are arbitrary (D&D), but consistent, with well-understood limitations. There's less backtracking, more dialog. Combat follows some unusual rules, but they're well-defined.

The interface is way more customisable. There are several camera modes, and one of them is freely controllable. Another basic feature I hadn't thought to mention is the minimap. You can remove it or change its size in NWN, and it's almost never in the way. In The Witcher, it's ever-present, too small, and doesn't zoom out enough. I got lost once or twice and it was of no help whatsoever. If you want to view it in is entirety, you need to open a menu that takes up the whole screen, halting progression. It wasn't useful in the way I would have wanted it to be.

The Witcher is oddly limited by its graphics, its animations, by the decision to dub every piece of dialog. The smaller, more focused areas lead to more backtracking, the dubbing limits the amount of dialog... Advanced graphics means I expect emotion to be conveyed through the characters' expressions just as much as their voices and lines, but this blank Geralt and the repetitive character models hamper this. These changes seem to go against several of the Aurora Engine's strengths.

It still baffles me that a single dev, working alone for several months, was capable of releasing an adventure that had as much scope as The Witcher, but a more profound, more mature plot and setting, that left plenty of possibilities for personal character development, when hundreds of people worked on the latter game, and came up with this mixed bag.

#Conclusion

A disppointment. The GOTY status critics awarded this game baffles me.

#Optimism

All that being said, the game implements some interesting mechanics (day/night cycle, partitioned skill tree, some of the monsters or plot points...). I like the character concept, and some chunks of the game. It's ambitious.

I'll probably play 2 (2019 edit : I did). It feels like some of the problems I mention might be addressed in the sequel. A new engine, different design decisions. A little more focus in the writing. Retain that peculiar atmosphere, the unsettling unfamiliarity. It might be a great game.

Ultimately, though, if anything I mention here makes sense to you, you'll probably end up with similar frustrations. If you can see past them, by all means, go ahead and give this one a try. It feels different, wild.

Otherwise, I'd probably recommend playing NWN, getting a slight feel for the mechanics, and then playing some of the player-made modules, like A Dance With Rogues.

