---
layout: post
title: "Hrmmmmm... (lost in thought) HrmmMMMmm (puzzled) Hmmmm ? (enquiring). [Does something] Hm (pleased with myself)"
published: true
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---


I have no idea how I heard of this game, nor when I started taking an interest in it. At least six months prior to its release.

Made mostly by a single developer, Brendon Chung, and set in the Citizen Abel universe previous games of his had already started fleshing out (I've since played Gravity Bone and Thirty Flights of Loving, but Quadrilateral Cowboy came first, in my case). Took him four years.

The gameplay was flabberghastingly impressive.

<!--more-->

I don't want to spoil this one too much. It's more or less a heist game. You input commands in a little 56Ko terminal, and take over other equipment or make use of gadgets.

(No need to know any programming, by the way, any adult can play this)

The level design is also very good. Each location a multi-faceted intricacy, requiring some good understanding of the toolkit, and careful observation.

What staggered me, though, was how Chung was able to significantly change the gameplay and the way one approaches the game multiple times throughout, in a consistent way. Your toolkit slowly expands, but suddenly, everything is jumbled around. Things can't be back to what they were. The protagonists pick up the pieces and cobble new equipment together, for a radically different gameplay experience.

It's astounding how much depth there is to the game's mechanics. And that this was made by one developer, using the Doom 3 engine.

I wanted more. Some of those ideas were brilliant, and I wanted to experience them in more ways.

The storytelling stands apart.

Your character is not alone. She is helped out by a couple of friends. There is some downtime between their missions, and some peaceful day-to-day interactions reflect both their relationship, and the slow passing-by of time. Some of these are contemplative, thought-provoking. There's a quiet, implicit trust between the three. 

This silent storytelling is very evocative, and provides a backdrop for the heists to have their purpose and place. Nothing ends up out-of-place.Gameplay ends up being extremely consistent with the other aspects of the game. It's beatifully consistent, a fulfilling whole.

The game feels like an adventure in an intriguing, at first -and only at first- naive-seeming, universe, but slowly also ends up almost feeling like reminescence. A continuous, focused tendril of thought, a nostalgic yearning for a chunk of a past that one cannot go back to. Or perhaps something not so melancholic, but rather a quiet soothing recollection of moments spent together, both relaxed and exhilarating, a long and loving gaze fondly cast at some old familiar photographs, before closing the book shut.

Thinking back to my time on this game conjures up deep emotion within me. Some of the lingering peace and nostalgia may have rubbed off onto me, or was instilled in me by the game. But it's also true. I cannot go back and play this and experience the same wonder, and the way it all unfolded the first time around makes me all the more aware of it. 

I don't usually feel this strongly nostalgic about a fantasy epoch or a world I don't know. The brilliant heists, the setting, the power of its quiet scenes.

Some people in my family are, or were, painters. I'm so used to their work taking up every corner of the walls in every room that they are part of an everyday and normal scenery, to me. I don't often stop and contemplate them and recall the times they depict, nor do I often feel eased and deeply moved by the gentle scenes they portray. I have a different relationship to their work, it having been such a part of my life.

Perhaps Quadrilateral Cowboy made me feel a little the way other people feel when they are profoundly moved by one of my father's paintings. 

Perhaps I'll feel something akin should I, aged and weathered, suddenly come across one, and be reminded of many old and powerful scenes at once, of memories which slowly would well up even more powerful emotions and nostalgia of times now gone.