---
layout: post
title: "Pull yer fingers outta yer arse, please, Geralt"
published: true
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

I'm going to be lazy and keep the same structure as the one for the previous game.

Spoilers in the second part. I'll make references to the first game throughout, so read that one first if you want to understand everything, I suppose.

<!--more-->

Anyway, ye, back to the CD Projekt universe. A little apprehension. Given how differently most people seemed to react to the first game, I expect many of the flaws I pointed out didn't bother them, so I have a hard time believing that CD Project will have adressed those issues. 

Still, they had four or five years to work on the sequel, they made their own engine, who knows.

Let's boot the game.

## Summary, brief

Edition Enhanced STOP pretty graphics STOP in-house engine STOP Better interface, not perfect STOP Choices still binary and dumb (but not black and white, hey now, watch what you say buster) STOP Gameplay kind of not very fun, combat definitely not fun STOP Some backtracking, but less of it STOP Not many new ideas STOP Sex is handled a little less immaturely STOP Crashes and bugs, script problems STOP Story, main character and setting are a lil' interesting STOP But dialog and plot are still simplistic and contain MAJOR bullshit narrative shortcuts STOP Will I play #3 ? Eeeeehhhh... I don't know STOP

(2019 edit : I did end up playing 3)

CD Projekt hasn't adressed any of the major issues carried over from the first game. Some things are better, but the major consistency, believability and narration issues are still here. And some of the gameplay decisions appealed to me even less than the first one's.

## General context, vague notes

A-RPG series drawing inspiration from a series of Polish novels. I haven't read them.

Enhanced Edition. A few bugfixes and extra quests. More on that later.

Inhouse engine, Bioware's Aurora Engine was dropped. A change in interface, amongst lots of little things, but the underlying game is pretty similar.

## Aesthetics

The game is pretty. Slick graphics. Pretty environments, with, sometimes, a very nice depth of view. I thought 1 was pretty, 2 is a step-up (am I still easily impressed by not having played many HD-era AAA games ?). There's still a lack of variety in character models, but it's far less of an issue compared to the previous game.

That being said, I did end up deactivating Depth of Field effects, because my eyes had trouble focusing.

Just like the first game, cutscenes use the game engine. Some flashbacks use animated sequences. The Enhanced Edition added a few extra cutscenes (a flashy intro, and some transitions between chapters narrated by Dandelion the bard). I'll get back to those.

A big improvement compared to the rigid first game that I appreciated a lot was the animations. During conversations, characters fold their arms, gaze elsewhere, stroke their chin, ... Someone disgusted by what they hear might roll their eyes, ... A lot of work was put into this, and it shows. It's not perfect, but Geralt is more expressive, less stiff. He very nearly smiles a couple of times, that's how much things have changed, hah.

## Audiosthetically

Eeeer, I dunno. I can't remember the music. 

The (English) dub is alright. Characters don't speak as slowly as in the first game, (maybe I've aged ?). There's still no conversation log, I missed a few minor chunks of dialog here and there.

Fewer typos in the English translation.

## Userinterfaceistically

I mentioned crashes in my review of the previous game. Well... This one pretty consistently crashed every time I quit the game, and every time I tried to ALT+TAB out of it, which was very annoying. And, of course, a few extra bonus crashes tossed in for free. Don't forget to save often...

Latest patch, up-to-date drivers, a graphics card that didn't cause too many issues. I don't think it's an issue on my end. I don't think a AAA production crashing like this can be easily excused.

I also softlocked once by accident. Oh, and if you hide the interface and display the ingame journal, the screen fades to black until the journal is closed.

Other than those nuisances, I think the engine change and overhaul was benefitial for CDP.

The menus are a little better (EXCEPT for the minimap, see [this video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bunzBQdB9EI) and [that one](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OOJxWJfvCxc) for an illustration). Conversations don't get interrupted, there's no need to wait for the end of some animations. That's neat. The inventory is a little larger. It looks different, but I got used to it.

I did get the impression there was some latency in the menus. It made the arm wrestling minigame pretty much unplayable for me.

## Quests, day/night cycle

Some improvements there. No need to find a campfire to rest (which reminds me, even with the power of FIREBALL and wood in his inventory, Geralt wasn't able to make his own campsite). Less tedious backtacking, in any case.

The journal is a bit intrusive. It provided spoilers by indicating what I was supposed to do to complete the current quests, sometimes even giving me indications I wasn't supposed to know. And sometimes, it didn't give me any indications.

Oh, and QTE was introduced into some cutscenes. I died a couple of times because I started to eat during cutscenes, not expecting a wild QTE to appear and require me to press some buttons.

## Upgrades, combat/stealth, difficulty

The tree- and layer-baed upgrade system is back. I still think it's an interesting system. 

Combat has changed significantly, however. In the first game, there were three combat modes (swift blows, strong blows, and hit-everyone blows). 2 says fuck dat shit. It's swift or strong only (left/right click).

There's also a backstabbing system. You take double damage if you're whacked in the back. I got clobbered to death by two blows of random enemies without understanding why, initially. Some of Geralt's animations are slow, and a group of enemy can combo you. You can parry, or dodge by rolling (and open yourself up to backstabs in the process).

My approach to combat in this game rapidly devolved to this :
- Whack some bad dude two-three times
- Roll or run away, or blast a FIREBALL
- If I'm runnin low on health (which happened often), run and dodge until I'm not at risk of dying from a backstab

It was *not* fun. Back stabbing, and not being able to whack multiple enemies when you often have to deal with groups very often make for a very frustrating and tedious experience in my opinion. 

The camera is often capricious. 

One of the bosses of the game was in a clsoed-in area. It was huge, and one swing would remove a quarter to half my health. For some unfathomable reason, some kind of random bloom or blur effect hampered me during this fight (and this fight only), collisions were also slightly off, meaning it occasionally got two or three hits on me in a row. It also takes Geralt quite a long time to get up after having been knocked down, meaning some of those one-twos were hard to avoid.

When faced with the prospect of several more hours of FUN FUN FUN along those lines, I ended up setting the difficulty to easy, and completed the game in easy mode. 

Going through my review of the first game again, I realise that I mentioned combat was slightly easy. Well, at least it wasn't tedious and silly. Rolling around all over the place looks a little pathetic.

Who knows, maybe I didn't use potions properly or didn't level my character up adequately.

Why can't Geralt roll when he doesn't have a weapon equipped ? Eh ?

Stealth mode is pretty basic. Dodge guards, knock 'em out. It wasn't too interesting in terms of mechanics. More on its consistency further on.

## Interficial atelligence

Hmm... Some efforts were made here and there. Slightly more interactivity (it's still very limited). NPCs are busier than in the first game. There's some guy lighting torches in the evening. Kids run after us in the street. Many more 'idle animations'. Not sure that's the proper term.

It's not bad. It's not that deep and immersive, though.

Pathfinding is still good. There are a few script issues though (zigzagging characters).

Combat AI is, however, still rudimentary. It seems unchanged from the first game (and therefore still inferior to games that are ten years older). Enemies swing at you when they can, and fail to hit Geralt when he's circling around them. Some never move away from a specific area, and don't really do much other than swing their weapon. The tougher enemies, and the mages all have very basic fight patterns.

# Spoiler territory *music emoticon*

## Approximate summary of the plot

Geralt = witcher. A sort of mutant, made stronger and capable of hunting monsters through a painful process. And sterile, too. In the first game, other witchers helped nurse him back to health after an injury. But he's amnesiac.

I'm not going to sum up that whole game here. Read my review of that one or some other source if you need the outline.

A few months have passed. Geralt is still amnesiac but some old memories occasionally pop up. Triss the red-haired witch is still here. We're accompanying the king we helped out in the first game. He's at war with barons who've kidnapped his two illegitimate kids.

He's killed at the end of the prologue, by another witcher, Geralt is blamed. Vernon Roche (leader of the Blue Stripes, a unit serving the king, Clive Owen -style voice, gruff and brooding but impulsive) isn't convinced he's guilty, lets him run away. The king wasn't the first ruler to have been murdered, there was another one who didn't make it past the intro cutscene.

Vernon and Geralt meet up and head off to track down the Kingslayer. End up in Flotsam (Reference to Monkey Island ?), at the heart of a region several kindoms are fighting over. The local garrison's commander is corrupt, racist, and an idiot. In the woods, some band of elves and dwarves (anti-human Scoia'tel, even more displeased with human behaviour after the first game's events) trouble the commander. 

We kill some big beast with another witch (not Triss)'s help, meet up with friends Zoltan the dwarf and Dandelion the bard. The Kingslayer (KS), who betrayed the elves who'd helped him, beats up in a fight while Roche and Iorveth (Scoia'tel leader) duke it out. The KS runs away after kidnapping Triss, who'd found a way to bring Geralt's memory back.

Choose between Iorveth and Vernon for the rest of the game. I chose Vernon.

Meet up with another king, Henselt, who is fighting vs Saskia, a peasant allied with knights and elves to resist Henselt's invasion attempt. Henselt kills some priest who curses him. The curse is problematic, threatens Henselt, and makes the KS harder to track down (him being the reason we met up with Henselt).

Geralt lifts the curse, prevents some of the KS's friends' attempt to kill Henselt. We find out that a witch (not Triss, the other one) is behind all of this. 

Vernon also belongs to some group that's out for Henselt's blood, but not the same one. Henselt is a threat to his own beloved country. When the king leans about this, he has Vernon's unit slaughtered (except for his second-in-command, whom he rapes). The war starts up again, now that the curse is lifted. Saskia dies, the witch runs away somewhere.

Vernon suggests going to some upcoming summit, during which witches and kings will discuss the future (two kings are dead, after all). A G20 with things actually happening. Henselt shows up gloating just when everyone's about to leave for the summit. He's not the nicest of people, I allow Vernon to kill him (making it three dead kings).

At the summit, the KS is captured, reveals the witches were behind all of this. One of the conspirators (the witch that's not Triss) flees thanks to a dragon that burns shit up, Geralt is the only guy on the other side of the flames (sigh), kills the dragon. Meanwhile, mages are massacred, even the innocent ones. Soldiers went overboard. Blood everywhere.

Geralt confronts the KS, who prevented Triss from being slaughtered. The KS starts to gabble a lot, talks about the Wild Hunt (3's subtitle), and his past with Geralt. The Empire wanted to weaken the Northern Kingdoms, and the witches have been had hurr durr. Their order wanted peace and stability (and a little money) and had plotted against one of the kings, but the Empire through the KS also laid the blame on them for the others, harr harr. We can fight the KS or let him go, I let him go. Geralt leaves with Triss and Vernon.

The end. I skimmed over some details, but that's the gist of it. I haven't tried Iorveth's path.

## I am frustrated

Just like in the first game :

- Non-manichean but very binary and very very very arbitrary choices. Geralt is still incapable of budging when he ought to and preventing catastrophies that befall and impact him later on. I do not comprehend why he is so passive.

- limited dialogs, scenaristic shortcuts, a shallow universe

- bullshit, lots of it

After an enjoyable enough prologue, and despite some of its improvements I've mentioned over its predecessor, The Witcher 2 takes a nosedive. The issues already present in the first game are back and pile up, and I am disappoint, much disappoint.

I can't understand how this is one of the best games of 2011. Surely that year wasn't that shitty.

## Bullshit Bros.

Well, well.

First off, something that very quickly pissed me off. Geralt can climb up or down some rocky areas, but ONLY very specific-looking ones. And guess what he does in one cutscene ? Yep, that's right, he scales a mountain. Oh, and in the forest, many plants also serve as invisible walls. 

The complete and absurd lack of consequences to looting random NPCs' houses is back. The AI doesn't give a shit. 

Here's one major example of bullshit the story threw at me :

Geralt, accompanied by Zoltan, heads off to see Iorveth. He chats with two elves to set the meeting up. Zoltan is rough and unimpressed by the elves. Geralt points out that they're surrounded by archers. Elves are shocked by the fact that he noticed them. Zoltan hadn't, and Geralt wasn't expected to be able to.

AAA enthusiast's inner thoughts : 'OMG ! Geralt is so smart and shit, he's so cool, you can't ambush that guy. By extension, since I'm playing this guy, it means I'm cool as well !! This game is sick'

Ten minutes later, we head off to chat with the Kingslayer (who is, let me remind you, also a witcher, albeit not an amnesiac one). Meanwhile, elves are encircling him. Meanwhile, Roche and the corrupt commander's men are also encircling them.

Geralt doesn't notice anything whatsoever, and neither does the KS. Immersion ? Consistency ? ICANTHEARYOULALALALALALAAAAAAAAAAAA.

Oh yeah, I can use a spell that conjures up FIREBALLS, and another one that destroys fragile walls and piles of stone, but I can't burn nor bash down a wooden door.

The prologue's stealth section is alright. Knock out guards, run away. Fine. In chapter one, you infiltrate the commander's gardens to obtain some information. Seven or eight guards patrol said gardens (which, uh, might be a bit much ?).

The game seems to think that knocking them out and there being no consequence is normal. Uuuuh, won't they wake up and wonder what happened to them... ?

## Sex is not quite so meaningless

The sex scenes in the first game gave me the distinct impression they were geared towards horny male teenagers that think with their dick. This one makes me think of a teenager that's only horny some of the time.

Sex isn't as present. It's no longer an undignified quest reward. The game is also a little less prude when it comes to showing naked bits. Well, hmm, actually. I remember having ample opportunity to gawk at Triss' voluptuous chest and legs, but I don't remember being given the opportunity to ogle Geralt's manly and vigorous white-haired dick.

It's a little better, by which I mean it's not quite as bad. It's still not a very adult approach to the topic (incidentally, hundreds of dead bodies in this game, but no detached heads, no limbs sliced off, no viscera spilled all over the floor ?). Some of the (female) characters are sexualised for no reason. A special award goes to Saskia (a peasant turned warrior), whose armour would cover her entire body if it didn't have cleavage.

## Choice and narraysheun

I mentioned some fight between Vernon, Iorveth and the KS. Let me provide a bit of context. 

Vernon no like Iorveth, who helped out the KS. When we learn the KS secretly betrayed the Scoia'tel, we go see Iorveth to tell him and hope to get closer to the KS.

We're able to, and while we chat with them, Vernon pops up out of nowhere and attacks the elves.

After that fight, we choose between Vernon and Iorveth to track down the KS.

There are several things that are wrong with this outcome.

- As I mentioned earlier, no one saw the soldiers coming.

- Geralt could have chatted with Vernon and probably convinced him to leave Iorveth alone this time (his priority is the KS, after all), but the game doesn't enable us to let Geralt sit down and have a think, assert himself and make this kind of sensible choice that would lead to less conflict, and possibly help out relationship between the races on the long term, while keeping a semblance of oh-so-precious witcher neutrality.

- We're incapable of shouting to interrupt some of the hostilities.

- After the fight, BOTH of them have the same main objective (find the KS), but, again, Geralt is incapable of considering that perhaps they could both provide help in some way or another without tearing each other apart.

Essentially, the plot builds up situations which Geralt could have completely avoided by throwing a tantrum at the right moment and acting preemptively. Instead, we once again have to put up with a passive, obedient, complacant twerp who doesn't ever think twice about what he's told to do, and lets many things slide with no clear reasoning.

Sure, you'll get non-black-and-white choices. But they'll still feel really dumb and arbitrary (and binary, in this instance). CD Projekt, you have failed me yet again.

The side quests all lead to a lot of backtracking, and all have similar design issues.

Other chunks of the plot felt very rickety, or cheap... The pathetic dragon we make a mockery of in the prologue (during a sad little QTE sequence), the dragon flames that block everyone but Geralt's paths in chapter 3, naive Saskia who sets off alone and defenseless to meet up with Henselt in chapter 2...

Geralt lowers his guard completely at least twice during the story, and I find one one of these instances hard to believe. Triss pops up and vanishes again during the prologue, claiming that 'my magic is useless here' before proving the contrary almost immediately afterwards. 

Many characters seem to have advanced knowledge regarding witcher spells and potions, which are supposed to be preciously kept trade secrets...

The end chat with the KS, who unleashes a lot of extra bullshit upon the plot.

The game also puts us in control of other characters at various specific points of the story. Vernon, Henselt, maybe others. A debatable decision, in my opinion. The cutscene bits narrated by Dandelion also feel like they're shoehorned in, the way he narrates is not in tune with the way the story unfolds. It's in character, perhaps, but slightly jarring for the player.

I was able to anticipate multiple times what was about to happen during several dialogs, or at specific points in the story (I move closer to a balliste, and "enemies are going to pop out of nowhere". Or, knowing simply by the level layout that such-and-such a door is going to be locked). 

The save file transfer system seemed to have a bug. It's supposed to make you able to start the game off with Geralt as you'd left him in the previous game, but I was told I'd killed a character I'd actually left alone. You can't recreate a character to work around that kind of issue.

It's not like the game really transfers your choices either. Some of it was retconned. You stuck with Shani in the first game ? Too bad, CD Projekt didn't have enough bandwidth to write her into this game's plot. Here, you spend most of the game with Triss, regardless of the first game's major decision.

You also start over at level 1, have forgotten half your works-on-witchers-only secret potion recipes (but you can buy them off random merchants), and have forgotten monsters' weak spots.

Sometimes NPCs fight alongside you. Triss, Vernon, ... They're weak as fuck. Triss, who healed us and wrecked havoc in the first game, sends FIREBALLS that are even weaker than my FIREBALLS, and doesn't heal us anymore (except in some cutscene, if I recall correctly...).

## Dialogs

Ugh. The game is pretty lacking in dialog, especially when taking its ARPG nature into account. As soon as discussions stop being relevant to the main story, people clam up. Many people will say 'Hello', or 'Witcher', and that's about it. Most of the time, unless we're in a cutscene or the conversation elaborates on specific main topics, about three sentences is the average conversation length.

I understand that Geralt might like to keep to himself, and that people aren't keen on interacting with him (in which case they probably shouldn't be saying 'Hello'), but this makes the world seem extremely hollow and empty. 

Even his closest friends have nothing to say to him. Say I just did something that affects five of the main protagonists. If it isn't main-quest-relevant, they will have nothing to say about it. Nothing. Zilch. Nada. It's like they don't give a toss. They don't help out much, either.

I found a letter on which it is stated clear as day that some lady is conspiring with the Scoia'tel (I rummaged through her belongings right under her nose), and am not able to discuss that finding with anyone whatsoever. Why, CDP, why ?

Why doesn't Geralt ask for help from Triss when he sets off to kill the Kraken ?? It's a beast he doesn't know well, and the other witch is slightly shady. Why not put all the odds on his side ? It's not like it's sure to be an easy fight at all.

Looking at the credits, six people contributed to the plot, but only two people are credited for the dialog...

## Minigames

They're mediocre. Poker dice, fist fighting, and arm wrestling. Arm wreslting requires one to reduce the mouse sensitivity and hope input latency won't affect the outcome too much. Poker dice is alright, but a little sluggish. Fist fighting == QTE. 

Wait a minute, why are there different skill levels in poker dice ? You have to beat a lot of people before you're able to challenge the masters. But, uh, this game is about 70% pure luck, much more so than regular poker. It doesn't work that way, especially if one round is all that you play.

# Wrap-up

I was having fun during the prologue. The story was intriguing, lots of things going on, a flashy presentation. With all the AI flubs and odd little details (a background scene behind a grate full of soldiers pretending to hit each other, I clearly wasn't expected to stop and look around), I couldn't really take the game seriously, but it was entertaining.

After that, though, things went downhill fast. The first game's biggest flaws haven't been adressed, and the improvements made elsewhere, however appreciated they are, don't make up for it.

There's just too much bullshit, too much tedium, too many boring fights. Incoherent events, dubiously presented dubious choices. I can't take the storyline seriously. No real depth to the characters, dialogs and plot. A mature game, hah.

It's a real shame, given that several aspects of the game are very polished (animations, chunks of the plot and universe). The writers have been able so far to write around Geralt's amnesia in a way that doesn't feel too forced (well, hmm, that being said, he's forgotten how to make potions but not how to break very specific curses, hmm).

I'd rather have had a better plot than a feature allowing me to change my haircut at the barber's.

Update (with plot spoilers)

Tried Iorveth's path.

Events unfold differently, which is annoying (Sile and Henselt teleport elsewhere, and there's no reason for this other than to make Geralt fight).

And then, some unconvincing dialog from Saskia. A war counsel that felt a little pathetic. I did get a few laughs out of it, some of the animations were ridiculous.

Playing through the game did remind me of a couple of things.

First off, the music is alright. They won't linger, but I listen to them without complaint. Secondly, the game makes too many fucking reference to Lord of the Rings. I get it, you're trying to be smart, game. There's a big ludonarrative dissonance though, because it almost seemed to me like all the ingame chars were in on the joke. As if they'd all read the book. Philippa Eilhart, a sorceress, mentions 'twenty sacred rings', and then Iorveth randomly spouts 'One ring to rule them all' out of nowhere. How can I take this war counsel seriously ?

(Perhaps this is a translation issue, more than a writing one, to be fair)

Two minutes after she mentions those rings, Philippa starts rambling about genetics, and how royal blood can lift a curse. Come off it. So few things are explained about the Witcher universe (I'm mostly ok with that, but it sometimes feels a little too convenient), and when people finally start talking about something, it makes no sense.

A few days later, I start playing again (offline, I almost exclusively play games, even steam games, offline). 'Key server not found'. Never had that one before, especially not after spending a few dozen hours on this then-five-year-old game.

Oh well, I can't be bothered to complete that path. I don't have the patience to endure through the game so as to know the different outcome of the main events.

(Credit to Maratz for digging up the videos.)

There's a couple of interesting articles somewhere about the minimap issues, and poker dice UI flaws, I can't be bothered to look for them.