---
layout: post
title: "Die and Learn"
published: true
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---


Buying games for their soundtrack, a bad habit I've been trying to break since...

It sometimes ends up a disappointment (Shatter was not appealing, despite its extremely catchy soundtrack), sometimes it's worth the risk.

Crypt of The Necrodancer belongs to the latter category. I can't remember when I first heard of it. 

<!--more-->

Perhaps I was listening to Super Meat Boy's, and came across that one. Same original composer, after all.

It's a rogue-like. But it's a rhythmic one.

Start up. Brief cutscene, pretty pixel art, feel free to ignore it if you're too impatient.

A lobby. Stairs. Hobble clumsily owards them and whoosh !

A closed dungeon. Its layout is a grid. I've a little dagger I can toss (if I do so, I'll have to walk over to it and pick it up), a bomb that can break most walls, a spade that can dig through mud, and that's it.

You can perform one action per beat of the music. Moving towards an enemy implies you're attacking them. Moving towards a wall implies you mean to dig that wall. 

Enemies move in rhythm, and each type of enemy has its own pattern.

This game can be played with two fingers. Arrow keys are all that you need. Admittedly, a couple of extra keys can make some inputs a little more comfortable.

Behaving according to the beat means more gold drops, and other related little bonuses. The beat is god. You submit to it, and lose yourself in it. Rhythm is key. Failing to abide to it means losing the pretty flashy colours and the gold bonuses.

Find the exit. Find the exit, Cadence. Lots of enemies in the way. Kill them for gold. A miniboss. Items can be found in crates, amongst other things. There's a merchant somewhere in each level. Mind your HP. Death means you start from the beginning.

Completing a zone moves you onto the next one. As you steadily improve, you...

Should I really provide more insight ? I think the enjoyment this game provides resides in part in understanding organically its various rules and interactions.

It's a rogue-like, but bloody well designed.

Cute sprites. I liked its soundtrack, and if you don't you can change it.

It's hard, but neither unfair, nor punishingly hard. The player is ALWAYS at fault. The rules are laid bare in front of you.

I messed up. I rushed in, believing I could handle it. I made that bad decision. The replay doesn't lie. No, it's my fault. The game is FAIR.

It's not unsurmountably hard, either. Finishing it with the default character isn't trivial, but with practice and a little dedication, it's gratifyingly rewarding. After that, difficulty ramps up some (and then a lot more, if you care to investigate further than I did), but it isn't fiendishly sadistic. The drive to complete it 100% has to come from within, in any case.

Even for very new players, COTN provides clear entry paths.

You don't complete the whole thing in one go at the start. You do it zone by zone, unlocking new items as you go along (meaning at the start, you generally aren't put off or flabbergasted by the daunting amount of rules or interactions you have to bear in mind while playing, since fewer items are available to mess with you). There's also some leverage provided if you care to use it to decide which items will be guaranteed to pop up in your next run.

This seems like a minor detail, but it's really helpful for the budding crypt explorer. It also provides more meaning to the inevitable deaths that'll happen along the path to completion, which is more than what most rogue-likes I know provide (to be fair, I've played few of them).

There are also a few training rooms, which provide practice opportunities against certain enemies, or teach you subtle and useful interactions.

Hardcore players can skip all of this and barge right in, of course. Every type of player should be able to get something in COTN, and almost none of that something is done at the expense of other players.

In terms of gameplay, it's ruddy addictive. Having to move in rhythm is puzzling at first, but one very quickly gets used to it, and it possesses the right blend of fun/frustration/sense of improvement that can engage a player without putting them off.

The beat also requires you to make decisions quickly. It's a great mechanic to avoid excessive camping and precaution, without unduly forcing a player into motion. It's ever-present, but not overbearing.

And that's where the game design shines. It becomes a game of anticipation, of forethought. Split-second decisions can be costly, it's better to look ahead. Consequences of our decisions are deterministic (or their probability of success can very easily be calculated). Even tight corners can be escaped from, with a little skill and/or luck. You can't work yourself into a guaranteed death way ahead of time here.

And one feels the improvement over time. Over time, enemy patterns slowly become clearer and are more easily played around. The beat becomes easier to follow. Decision-making is swifter, accomplished in a less hesitant fashion. 

I was never frustrated by my failures. They were always my fault.

I love the items. Ever-present tradeoffs. Some benefit some characters more than others. My playstyle is picky, I tend to gravitate towards the same few helpful friends. But it's up to me to choose.

The game has a timer and a score system. Die-hard difficulty addicts have plenty of challenge and margin for improvement ahead of them if they care for it.

It also has plenty of additional content. Other characters with radically different playstyles. Other game modes. Variants on the soundtrack. Extra challenges. Steam achievements that are actually meaningful if you're interested in those.

Several interactions I found out came as pleasant surprises. Little touches left by the devs. They care.

COTN's design is [fabulous](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=46Y3BfFefHM). I think it can be a delight to play for anyone that allows themselves to get hooked.