---
layout: post
title: "Mirror's Edge review"
published: true
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---


<!--more-->

I mostly agree with what Maratz had to say about Mirror's Edge and mostly focus on a few things he only briefly mentioned, go read his review if you can read French. Actually, he hasn't uploaded it on his site yet. 

The game's aesthetic differs from a lot of other games that came out around the same time. Everything glistens oddly in the sunlight, as if plastic were mixed into the concrete. Textures are very smooth, and the rooftops you run on are very clean. No rain. 

The city's layout and architecture could have felt like a very unique place if more effort had been put into it.

This game wants you to feel. It definitely succeeded at making me feel I was jumping, especially with headphones on. If you were able to build up a little speed beforehand, you hear and almost feel the wind whooshing in your face. 

This makes a big difference in terms of feedback and immersion. I'm sure my butt often clenched when attempting difficult jumps.

If the game had been able to nurture the state of flow it was able to put me into once or twice, it could have been an incredible experience. Running around with the wind blowing Faith's hair back.

This game is quite likely very fun to speedrun. Those are worth checking out. This is the way the gameplay wants you to play. Speedrunning seems to me to be the ultimate Mirror's Edge experience.

Unfortunately, I am not a Mirror's Edge speedrunner. I don't have the drive. And EA seem to believe the game needed something other than Faith running and jumping all over the place, and throughout the game constantly and consistently undermines the incredible thrill it had been able to provide me.

The game tried to have a story, or at least some kind of setting.

Unfortunately, there are about ten characters total in this story. A few of them die. Can you guess which one among those left is the main villain ? It was him ? Shocking. Who would have thunk. What a twist. 

The main character, a young woman named Faith, is part of a messenger network that aims to make sure bits of info make it past ongoing governmental censorship. Aaaaand that's about it.

You learn a few things by reading tidbits sprinkled here and there on advertising  panels, or screens in elevators. The characters seem to know what's going on, but the game can't be bothered to let the player in on it.

Why ?
I understand that the main focus is gameplay, and that Faith doesn't care about me and won't randomly explain stuff for no reason, but this isn't an uniterrupted thrill ride. It's an eight-hour game, which teases you with its intriguing universe it only goes halfway into explaining. 

The city felt like an empty shell, and the plot like a failed attempt at filling the void. It needed either more or less to do so. As is, the game felt like a linear platforming session with no world map. There seems to be little real meaning to what you're making Faith do, even though the plot wanted you to believe there is.

There's also a big divide between the way the game tries to look plausible and realistic and what you end up actually doing.

On one hand, Faith can't reload weapons, she carries no ammo. Sure, why not. Heavy weapons render her unable to run or jump properly. She's immensely fit, but not that tough, capable of withstanding only a few hits before being knocked out. Fail one overambitious jump, and she'll go splat.

On the other hand, Faith can jump 5 feet from a standing position. She can run 20 mph on concrete indefinitely, survive 30 feet falls by rolling, be hanging on to some pipe and jump up 3 feet using only her upper-body strength.

I understand some concessions to realism were made for the benefits of this game. But I'd like to be able to jump over a flower pot when I'm holding an empty machine gun. 


The game is not very interactive. You press buttons, turn some valves (which tend to switch hazards off like steam, why are there hazards in the first place ?). You run. You jump. 

I remember near the end of the game trying to hop over a table on which were resting two desklamps. Nope. The lamps can't be interacted with, and are placeables, meaning they don't have physics. They won't budge. No jumping over this table.
Why do I die when I touch barbed wire ? Faith couldn't carry cutting pliers ? Clandestine freerunners carry no equipment ?

The explanation is that this is a incredibly linear game. You don't make your own path. Start the level in some arbitrary spot of the city (how did Faith get there ?) and run from A to B. Sometimes you can choose between two different ways of getting from one building to the next. If you look for a third one, Faith appears to impales herself on barbed wire she grazes.

Free running. FREE running. Those messengers are supposed to be able to go anywhere they please. The level design completely contradicts the setting the game tries to sell itself on.

Being linear didn't mean it was a smooth uninterrupted ride from A to B, either. I sometimes had to look around for the next place I could run to, or the next doorhandle I could interact with. Having to explore or poke around a bit isn't the problem. The problem is that there are times where you follow barbed wire to find your next destination, and times where you waste ten minutes going through the same few rooms over and over again because you failed to notice the exit.

This hurts the pacing and flow. I mostly blame the game's level design, not myself. Perhaps I did play it once or twice while tired, though.

Rooftops and buildings are nonsensical. Barbed wire, pipes leading nowhere, random ventilation conduits. Planks laid down to enable Faith to jump to a distant building. How placed them there ? I'd like to believe they were left there by other messengers, but the rest doesn't make sense. I probably wasn't supposed to think that far.

When you look down at the streets below, they're empty. Too empty. You get the same car popping up and turning the corner every 30 seconds, and one passer-by hobbles along and vanishes behind some building.

The rooftops, though, wow. Generic enemies all over the place. But no drunks, no shady blokes, no secretaries working at their desks inside the buildings. No sailors in that one boat you stagger through.

This wouldn't be anywhere near as much of an issue if the game hadn't had this half-hearted attempt at creating some unique setting and plot, amidst all those out-of-place and incoherent details scattered around.

Sequences with enemies shooting at you are a nuisance. Fighting is clumsy and mostly jarring. You can't easily avoid a lot of those fights, so you can't keep running and jumping. And you can't always stop and gaze at things, enemies may force you to keep moving.

Faith should have taken the taxi. Far fewer people out on the streets, seems far safer to me.

The story is a bad joke. The game mocks you several times. You fail one of the missions, Faith failed to obtain some desired bit of information. She pauses briefly, then spots some gigantic advert which had been all over the place from the beginning of the game, remembers some vague detail from a previous level, and concludes that investigating the company on the advertisement might be worthwhile.

I should have written down some of the dialogs. Characters spouted some really silly crap.

No, wait, I do remember one thing. Take Miller. Policeman guy who helps Faith a little.

He pops up out of nowhere in the last level (and was he doing there ? How did he get there ?). He says something silly and then states 'I'll hold them back. Go' and points his gun towards the room Faith ran in from.

He later chats with her via the, uh, intercom (?), then shouts incoherently, you hear gunfire, which is then replaced by radio noise. 

I think even the voice actor couldn't get into the story. He didn't sound very convincing.

Miller later remotely unlocks some elevator for Faith. Every character in this game -barring Faith- is a hacking expert.

The game ends somewhat abruptly, with no clear explanation, no real conclusion. The 'baddies' you encounter pop up randomly in the plot.

I think a runaway ending that wants to leave things to the imagination like this one tried to do can't really work with all the issues I mentioned earlier. I don't believe in these characters. In this universe. But I wanted to.

And the thrills are plagued by the linear level design and constant interruptions by armed goons. 

Where's the freedom ? Where's the running ?

Mercury (the guy helping you out on the radio) mentions in one of the levels that he's looking at the floor plans of the building Faith is in.

But, uuuuh, what about Faith ? Why couldn't she have a look at the layout as well ? In her shoes, I'd study layouts and at the very least make sure my destination can be reached. With more time, I'd plan an approximate route, backup plans, and so on.

Why ? Why ? Why ? There are so many whys in this game.

Why can Faith open some doors but not others ? Why can Faith break some windows with her fist and not others ? Why bother with the shooting sequences ? Why do I start levels at arbitrary points ? Why does the game's plot resemble some mindless Hollywoord drab so much ? Why do enemies attack me one by one ?

Running and jumping the way Faith lets you had so much potential. It certainly wasn't perfect. Sometimes I missed jumps without understanding why, or because my angle of approach was off by half an inch. You can't turn your head when hanging from a ledge.
 
The limited field-of-vision (60-90s in most videogames) means you can't reproduce the kind of spatial awareness humans have (> 200 degrees). It's more noticeable in Mirror's Edge than most games. When you twirl around, or roll, you feel that difference. You can lose your bearings slightly after doing a couple of things, and that would never happen IRL. You might also know an enemy is right outside the edge of the screen, but be unable to see him, and feel like you should be able to. Perhaps this might be a game that could benefit from VR. (I didn't think I'd imagine myself saying this, I'm not too keen on VR as a concept).

But, imperfect, and limited by the screen as it was, the idea still had much more potential than what came out of EA's factory line.

An open-world where you study layouts and plan your routes. Opportunities for infiltration. Delivering actual messages, uuuh, because that's Faith's job... Isn't it ? Deliver important stuff to memebers of the resistance. The game makes you think only Mercury and Faith are doing anything.

Multiplayer could have been something, as well.

Instead, you get a game with no clear direction, with closed-in rooftops full of enemies. You want to run, but they stop you. You want to stop and gaze at the city and wonder, but then you have to run, and you end up in dreary corridors. You want to make sense of this story and setting, because the game wants you to, but that's a vain quest.

If you're playing this game casually, don't watch the cutscenes, don't listen to anybody other than Faith. Only she really knows what's going on, and what's worthwhile in this game : that you feel the wind, feel the knot in your stomach when you're running towards the edge and the lurch when you start dipping. The impact when you land. Feel what Faith feels.

Speedrun this game. Or watch speedruns of it. Don't play it casually.

4/10 or something

As for the sequel, I don't know much about it. I watched a trailer, and Faith was following some red smoke trail around. That's a gigantic red flag. [And from what Mark Brown shows of the game](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gg0Nbfzo_00), I don't think I'd like it much. The design issues he goes over are a problem. I didn't like Burnout Paradise's open-world either, so that's not helping. I don't usually feel like quoting people like Mark Brown, but for this game I don't have any other second opinions at hand, and his isn't uninteresting


(I uploaded this bit early 2016 on another website. I translated it, made some changes and posted it here (2019/03/17). I'll get the French version online once I've gone through it a little more and gotten around to making a proper language switch option. Maybe I'll try and do something about the retconning dates, it does bug me.)