---
layout: post
title: "Left Mouse Button to read this review..."
published: true
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
--- 

I've only played Episode 1 of Life is Strange, so I can't really talk much about the overarching narrative or character-building. But I would say I've experienced enough of the game to discuss other aspects, and overall Dotnod Entertainment's general way of doing things quickly becomes pretty apparent. No major spoilers in this review, I believe, but no promises. I can't spoil more than part 1, in any case. You have been warned.

<!--more-->

I believe I didn't know much about the game before launching it. Only that there's some stuff about player choice, that many people appreciated the series, consider it well written, with endearing and lovable characters, and so on. That ur choicez matteur. An appealing premise. Oh, and Dotnod is a French studio, so french touch and all that. Maybe one of my friends had disliked it

You play as Max, a photography student and geek, somewhat of an introvert but not completely, who quickly realises she can rewind time and change the outcome of some of her past decisions -> ze power of choice. So a heroin with traits that aren't all too common in videogames, bestowed with an intriguing power. If writing and gameplay hold up, this could be a really good game.

You start, and are greeted with a ..... Two minutes of on-rails gameplay later, Max wakes up in a classroom. The teacher rambles on about shallow topics (in my opinion) relating to photography, selfies in particular. I don't like selfies.

The user interface very quickly turns out to be intrusive. I want to get my bearings, have a look around the classroom and adjust my field of view to its size, but as soon as my gaze happens upon an interactible item, some text pops up and indicates my available interaction options. If I want to undertake one, I need to hold a mouse button down, and release it once my mouse cursor is properly superimposed with the action's text. I find this somewhat clumsy. There are probably better ways of doing this, and when the text is hidden behind something else, it's a little irksome. Nothing too vexing, but since that's about it in terms of gameplay, you'll experience that irk fairly often.

In any case. I take a look at my desk, and whenever I focus on one of my personal belongings, Max's thoughts are heard. It very quickly becomes clear I have no choice but to take a selfie. I take the blasted selfie, the plot advances. You get to watch the class play itself out a little, and learn a little about some characters' personalities.

This isn't a very reassuring start. The dialogues are bugging me, whether it be Max's inner thoughts or the rest, or the accents and the way people talk. Shortly later, my growing worries are confirmed.

Dotnod is afraid. Afraid that I might get lost, get annoyed, that I might misinterpret something Max says. That I miss some crucial detail, and decide to blame and bash the game. That I might not know what to do at some point. And like any AAA company that doesn't really respect its games nor the players, Dotnod decided to shoot itself in the foot.

Max comments on EVERYTHING happening around her as if she were discovering it all for the first time. She's been in this school for a while, no ? This is jarring, and makes many of her comments feel soulless. What a shame.

She also doesn't have any random thoughts, only well-fleshed out ones, no interjections... I hope you get what I mean. It's too clean, too clear.

Even with this layer of forced clear exposition that .... Max's personality, and with this interface that is desperate to tell you what you can do without asking for your opinion in the matter, Dotnod still felt insecure enough to implement more hand-holding. Some camera angles deliberately goad you into some interactions, and comments made by NPCs or sometimes Max often tell you what to do next. Sometimes, you get all three at once : Max, NPC, and camera, and you feel like you're in an Activision FPS. On top of that, the game is incredibly linear.

Erm, er ? Game ? Choice ? Where's my player choice ?

You can rewind time if a decision you made didn't turn out the way you would have liked it to. By decision I mean a dialogue option. So if Max comes out as an idiot during a conversation, she can zip back and select a different answer. A somewhat uncommon mechanic, but I have a few gripes with it.

First off, when you use it, people end up liking Max a little too much. She's been here for a month, has spoken with almost no one, then vaguely helps people out, and bam, becomes the 'life and breath' of this little world. I'm slightly exaggerating, but this isn't good writing. One rarely builds deep lasting friendships in a single day... And even if Max has had some prior interaction with some characters, the pseudo-amnesia and 'first-time' issue I mentioned earlier gives me the impression she's meeting people for the first time. Hence the odd feeling that those relationships are progressing way too fast.

Besides... This rewinding stuff... Isn't it really a way of manipulating people. Max gets praises she doesn't deserve several times throughout. She cheated, so to speak.

I don't think she has ill intentions, but I don't think she's that naive either. So her complete absence of introspection regarding the fact that she's manipulating people surprises me somewhat. It reminds me of To The Moon. I would have expected Max to have some reservations about the whole thing.

Lastly : The rules are not clear. Max at one point thinks back to some point in her life five years prior to the events of the game, and sighs while saying that she 'can't rewind time that far back'. Wha ? Why not ? How do you know that ? Why can't you rewind time back to the start of the episode if its end doesn't appeal to you ? 

The answer to that is Game Designers. There are also a few instances where rewinding is impossible.

Choices are often binary. You make a choice, observe its consequences, and if you're unsure you'll like them, zip back and eat the lemon tart instead of that chocolate mousse. Sometimes, you'd expect other choices to pop up, or longer conversations with some protagonists, but Dotnod has other plans.

Here's one example :
The security guy in the school is being a bit too verbally agressive to another student (no clue why). Choices :

A : Butt in and prevent him from harassing the poor girl any further. He'll be angry ("I will remember this conversation", says he). The girl thanks us, then more or less says "thanks, I have to go now" and leaves without any explanation.

B : Do nothing. She's scared. He leaves after a while, doesn't notice Max. She does, realises we didn't intervene, is angry at Max.

(By the way, there some point before or after this event where you can't rewind, if I remember correctly. This may be due to a loading zone. I'm not sure, it was never explained).

No option C. You can't avoid being noticed by the girl if you opt for B, or choose your words more wisely if you go for A. I mean, it's not like Max had a power allowing her to rewind time, eh ? No, here, even if both options have avoidable negative consequences for her, Max is content. She's too lazy to smooth things out properly.

Essentially, this isn't Groundhog Day (a film which handled the similar topic of making decisions with awareness of the consequences much more coherently). And it's a shame. This makes the gameplay feel artificial and ..... Your choices are fake. You rewind because you angered some other character without really knowing why they got angry. Some of these choices also seem to conflict with Max's personality, too.

And, I mean, fuck, the game is linear, bossy, and keeps telling me what I should be doing. Max also makes some a posteriori comments on her decisions. I never feel any kind of freedom of choice or proper control over the game's events, which isn't how the game was marketed. Nor does it feel deliberate. Rewinding time ends up being a giant gimmick. And it's like you're playing the game with a walkthrough.

The concept had potential, though. Go watch Groundhog Day, perhaps you'll see what I mean.

And that's not it, either. When you make a choice that might impact the whole story, the game really wants to make sure you're aware of it, that you make the choice you really wanted to make. A message pops up, indicating that "this choice will have consequences". On top of the "I will remember this conversation" I mentioned some NPC spouted earlier. Gee thanks. I don't need all this hand-holding, dammit. I'm an adult. I can suffer the consequences of my actions.

Also, wow. The game is admitting that most of those choices are actually inconsequential. Besides, this definitely kills any kind of immersion I might have had. And I *don't* like this kind of hand-holding. I CHOSE TO WATER A PLANT AND MY CHOICE WILL HAVE CONSEQUENCES.

The interface is a big problem. When I'm near a loading zone, a message pops up and says "Left Mouse Button to go to...". Why, thank you. How intrusive. And it pops up every single time. I'm constantly reminded that Dotnod was incapable of finding an intuitive way of making the player notice transitions and have to unexpectedly click, so they felt compelled to ruin immersion even further by intruding on the player. There had to be a better way of doing this. Even the wording is odd. And all this for a left click. Come on.

Gameplay-wise, I am thorougly disappointed. What about the story.

A quick note on the graphics and music : they're pretty decent. Uncanny valley at times, and some animations are a little rigid or over-the-top, but some graphical effects (time rewinding, for instance, or the fact that some textures look like they were directly painted on top of the characters) appeal to me. The music wasn't my cup of tea (US traditional folk/pop stuff, I think... ?), but are probably somewhat appropriate.

Anyway, the writing...

I've already touched a little on it. Max's inner monologues are sloppily written. Binary choices also mean you experience two sometimes radically different reactions, and it's not always very consistent... Many of the NPCs are US student clichés. I hadn't mentioned it earlier, but the game takes place in the US, which pisses me off a fair bit. The game features gun problems, some drama queens, a rich daughter who dislikes some rich son and calls him a rich son. Or something along those lines, I'm not too sure about that bit. There's a girl piloting some drone.

That setting really bothers me... I've seen US universities in several films, mostly teen movies or forgettable Hollywood blockbusters, and the game seems to draw inspiration from those more than the actual thing. I'd have liked to have experienced something other than this setting I really can't relate to. Perhaps you don't feel oversaturated and at odds from all the US culture in entertainment, but I do.

(The campus is empty, and there are maybe ten students on the school grounds).

The game does redeem itself very slightly later on, and phew, I'm glad that suffering that infuriating first half hour turned out to have some payoff. Near the end of the episode, the dialogues and character interactions started to feel a lot more natural and written less sloppily.

Spoiler : A friend Max hasn't seen in five years helps her out of a potentially tight spot, and they start talking about the past and their respective lives. Throughout this conversation between those two girls, I detect no clichés, no sappy crap, no artificial bullshit, and there are no pointless arbitrary rewind options. Two friends talking engaging in small talk and rekindling their relationship, and it feels natural. It felt believable, and I was interested in what they were saying. During those few minutes, I suddenly felt like I was actually learning about Max, or what I wish Max could have been without Dotnod's constant hijacking for the benefits of player exposition. I faintly understand why some critics appreciated the game so  much.

And then the episode ends. Too bad. The game had its brief moment. Oh well.

I'm not going to slog through the whole thing. In terms of gameplay and dialogue I know just about exactly what I'd be in for. Dotnot won't take any risks or have some new take on the genre. I dislike too many things about this game to suffer through fifteen painful hours just for that one half-hour of interesting and meaningful dialogue. I'd rather play something else.

When the game is supposed to be about choice and ends up being such an on-rails experience... Perhaps if it had been upfront about it and held my hand less throughout, I might have been more forgiving.

A disappointing experience. It had potential, but went the Telltale route, with a quicksave option presented as a time rewind mechanic.

2019 addendums :

Play Butterfly Soup by Brianna Lei instead. It's like that bit of dialogue I mentioned earlier, but better, and it's funny, honest with the player and is a big breath of fresh air. Well-written female characters that talk shit and discuss their problems, hopes, ambitions, love stories in a meaningful and natural way. All this AAA gunge with dozens of people writing and editing dialogues, and all of that pales compared to the writing of a single indie dev. It's free, too. It's great.

Other notes :

Looking back on it, I don't really like Max. I didn't emphasise this enough. Apart from that one bit, she feels fake from beginning to end. No one talks like that. The characters all feel entitled, or forced. As if the writers tried to hard to appeal to its core audience by making Max this shy geeky introvert who tries to overcome the problems life throws at her. None of the friends I know who've played this game felt she really did them justice, and we all reacted pretty negatively to her. There's something else that's wrong here, and this review doesn't expand on it enough. The writing's approach to teenage issues and some of the serious topics it broaches is way too naive and forceful. I don't like it. Beyond that bit of dialogue that I enjoyed, there really is little I find appealing about this game.

2/10