---
layout: post
title: "Random ramp city"
published: true
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

Ah, racing games.

I'm mostly uninterested in that genre. I care not about cars, in fact I'd say I don't like them, and even Mario Kart games and the like tend to wear me out pretty quickly.

Burnout though. A notable exception, in my case.

The Burnout Paradise instalment looked really promising. I'd been wanting to play it for several years before I finally got around to it.

<!--more-->

The first game in the series might be the very first home console game I've ever played. I bought it and played it years later, and come back to it every now and then. 2 had some things going for it, as well. Takedown I've only played a little so far. Legends didn't leave much of an impression, but wasn't bad (been a while though).

What keeps drawing me back to this series, beyond occasional dangerous bouts of nostalgia ?

First off, the crashes. They're fun. Taking risks to fill up the boost meter, I like that mechanic as well.

There was also something about the series, initially anyway, that didn't seem to care too much about its setting. In 1 or 2, you drive a more or less generic-looking car (stats differ, but cars have no recognisable brand and are instead called 'coupé' and 'roadster'), on ordinary, almost nondescript roads.

No tuning, no Need For Speed Underground atmosphere, no unnecessary flattery by trying to tell me I'm a flashy driver. Pure arcade racing, and nothing else. I particularly like the feel of the game in 1. Visceral crashes, too. There's no need to add anything else to this, really. 

(...)

One of the things that I was always puzzled about as a kid, was the fact that some tracks overlapped a fair bit, and that it felt like one should be able to roam around freely. Which is what Burnout Paradise is about, so 10-year-old-me would be gushing with joy at the idea of playing this game.

Unfortunately, the game came out in 2007 (2008 ?). The Ultimate Box version was released in 2010 and 2011 or so, and adds some extra content. Like, four motorbikes or something. Criterion was bought by EA back in 2003 or 2004, and since that time a new generation of consoles has taken over. 

Launching the game, one of the first things that pops up is the EA logo I'm becoming more and more prejudiced against, and then the game asks me if I want to create an online account.

I am playing offline, there is no online connection at the moment. If I had any doubts the game didn't come out during the PS3/360/Steam era or later, this tossed them aside. 

And *every single time* you launch that game, EA blatantly ignores both player comfort and the laws of causality (and my patience) and thinks it might be a good idea to ask again whether I want to create a new account. This feels like Microsoft trying to force me to switch to Windows 10, it's a bit pathetic, and downright annoying. I haven't even started playing.

I start the game, get dropped in a city, and find myself in a junkyard. I choose a car (I just want to play, and what's this text at the bottom yattering on about the car ?), and then boom, you're set, and free to the roam around, in the city known very modestly as Paradise City.

Right, so I'm free to explore. At crossroads you can start races, road rages (a mode where you take down as many vehicles as possible before you own gets totalled), er, stunt runs (score maximum points by driving like a looney), marked man challenges (like Road Rage, except everyone's out to get you), and burning route challenges (go from A to B within a set time limit to unlock a specific vehicle).

I don't really know what I'm doing and didn't find a manual within the game files (2019 note : eh ?), so I let some DJ way too full of himself give me a few pointers. He tries far too hard to be cool, and thinks he is, and I find him ingratiating, but this is on PC and the controls have changed a little, and starting a race or drifting wasn't immediately intuitive.

The first thing I notice, and that's not a good look, given what I said earlier, is that filling up the boost meter is a joke. Drive 50m on the wrong side of the road, 'graze' a car that's actually in another lane, drift very briefly, and there's your turbo.

"There's a boost meter, it's just like the other games", I hear you say (or not). Well, no, it isn't. In 1 and 2, the ones I know best, filling your boost meter was taking risks. It's a significant component of the rush these games can provide, just like the speed or the crashes' visual and visceral appeal.

A 'near miss' was a proper 'near miss'. It wasn't waving at a car in the other lane as it passes you by. In Paradise though, pfah. It's a joke. Unfortunately, filling up your boost meter that fast, with little risk involved doesn't feel very fun to me, nor does it feel very much like Burnout. It's undermining a central mechanic of the series without completely giving up on it altogether, meaning it stays in the game and feels decidedly underwhelming. Boost is available so often that it makes the speed rush feel almost banal.

Crashes also very quickly feel anecdotal. They used to be a constant threat when racing, and happened on average multiple times during a race. Some areas had a lot more traffic, and crashes due to overzealous attempts at filling your meter could make you waste precious time. 

Here, the city is -most of the time- so empty that one rarely collides with another vehicle. Even at the traffic lights or on motorways the roads are almost devoid of vehicles.

"So, Maqe, do you mean to say you're more or less permaboosting, and... never crash ? Am I interpreting this correctly ?"

Yes to the first point, no to the second.

The roads are this empty because Paradise appears to be (over)compensating with obstacles of a different nature. The scenery is cluttered with way too much visual junk. Between all the advertising billboards (many of which make references to the series or to fake products relating to the game or the series, but there's also some real fucking product placement in here), lots of little confusing details on the roads and in the environment, and all the stupid ramps lying all over the place for no reason, it's hard to tell where the crossing are, and I often found myself smashing into fences or gates because I thought they were crossroads. The minimap doesn't help that much, and I ended up screening the scenery far too hard to find the right intersection, only to ram into a fuCKING RAMP AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAH.

Perhaps the city's lack of traffic is so that the player can move from A to B rather smoothly, without crashing too much or having to slow down considerably along the way. I understand the sentiment, but this feels like a letdown. A problem fundamentally left unsolved.

I hadn't mentioned it yet, but one doesn't simply drive from one crossroad to another to start races in this game. There are things to do in this here city. Namely, uncovering the many shortcuts (which you can single out among the clutter thanks to yellow barriers you can smash through), finding the 120 red pannels -very easy to spot- labelled "Burnout" and smashing through them, and making the 50 "Super Jumps" (using ramps with blue traffic cones, because that makes them special).

That's right. Burnout Paradise is a collect'em'up.

I was given a driver's license at the start of the game (wait, a *driver's license* ? In Burnout ? That's odd). You need to complete a certain amount of events to upgrade your license... Complete more events, unlock more cars. Upgrade them thanks to the burning routes. The cars are tuned-up 'me and my big engine, sorry, my really big engine'-type vehicles. This is a far call from the original generic vehicles which I was much happier with.

I mentioned a junkyard earlier, but there are actually five of those. And five spots where you can give your car a different lick of paint (more tuning, fuck), 15 spots that fill up your boost meter (as if I needed that), and 12 locations where you can get your car repaired.

This red-blue-yellow trio of collectible junk of EA's very quickly drained any joy I had spontaneously exploring the city, and I was soon bored out of my skull. 

Besides, all those adverts, the extra crap littered all over the place, this is all far too much visual pollution for me (and makes crashes due to clutter or visual overload rather than due to misassessing a situation much likelier). And the ramps all every-fucking-where, even in spots where they make no sense, this all contrasts so much with the arcade and pure, raw driving of the other games I know. And those blasted ramps weren't, in my opinion, necessary, a believable city would have been a perfectly adequate place to muck about in. Which makes this worse.

Oh yeah. Another problem. You can also swandive from some buldings, drive up to the rooftops of parking lots and launch yourself off a ramp, knock some pylons down... But when you want to go someplace that isn't highlighted by a flashy colour or sorts (for instance, some private mansion's grounds, which are off-limits thanks to some measly three-foot high barrier near the entrance), well, you can't. Impossible. It's akin to invisible walls. And of course, you find those ramps arbitrarily all over the place, but *not here*. You can't go there.

So you're not very free to explore, all things considered.

You're also subject to some backtracking. It's not too bad, because you get to decide how to make your way back through the city, but it's there.

For instance, you sometimes need to switch cars for specific events. This means you need to go to a junkyard. If ever you happened to unlock new vehicles in the meantime, you have to sit through an unskippable 10-second presentation for every new car. When you fail a race you also have to drive back to the intersection it starts at. Understandable, but it does grow a little old. The game is really easy though, meh, so that helps.

What definitely nailed the fun in the coffin for me though, and made pottering about in the city feel even more vain and hollow outside of memorising its layout, was when I found out by chance that pressing two triggers started a sort of crash mode at various crossroads. Thousands of cars pop out of nowhere. You 'enter crash mode', so to speak. Similarly, during road rage or marked man races, lots of vehicles pop out of nowhere.

What bothers me about this, is that there's no clear link between the races, and roaming around in the city. So much could have been done with this idea though. Busy traffic hours, encountering other random drivers (this does happen, but only after completing challenges, and only in order for you to destroy a vehicle to unlock it), watch car chases take place...

The DJ, when he's not giving me tips or patronisingly telling me how cool it is to be a driver in Paradise City, mentions other vehicles, races, 'drivers'. Where ? In the city ? Or when *I* start a race at some crossroad ? Why mention drivers anyway ? The cars have always been driverless in Burnout. The only time I've ever seen anything resembling a human in this series was when I tried driving a motorbike (and even then, when I crash, squalala, the driver teleports elsewhere).

This is so strange. There's a night and day cycle, sometimes a few minor things happen, some hidden areas are interesting, but the city is so dead.

in practice, this 'crash mode' is mentioned earlier is exactly that, a separate game mode, almost completely unrelated to the city you roam around in. What's the point of the roaming around then ? Might has well have stuck with the closed and independent tracks of the previous games, if this empty city ends up being nearly the same, but with added product placement.

This is such a shame, because if one is able to look past the cluttered scenery and visual nuisances (and occasional strange layout of some roads), the city and its vicinity seem well-designed, and are moderately pleasant to drive around with. 

Adjusting your course during a race, optimising it after a little forethought, choosing a shortcut... This feels gratifying, but the rest of the package spoils it. And it could have been so much better.

It would have been more fun if the game weren't so easy. Races are aplenty, but short in length, a pop-corn approach to content. It would also be more fun with fewer blooming ramps and a better minimap. Since I can't see what I'm doing and don't know the map well enough, I have to pause the game to check where I'm supposed to go and how to get there. Maybe I should have redrawn it or printed it. But in any case, the IA is a bit thick and appears not to know the city's layout very well either, contrary to what the DJ wants me to believe.

I'm not liking this game very much so far. Anything that could make up for its shortcomings ?

Crashes ? Meh. Yeah yeah, this is a recent game, we get better graphics and more flying parts, but I feel they lack oomph. The camera angles are often poorly chosen, and with such an empty city crashes involving more than three vehicles are rare. It doesn't get to be very visually impressive, not very gritty. The way cars are deformed under pressure is much more complex than before, though.

The soundtrack ? It's... It's alright. There's some rock stuff that's a bit like Takedown or Legends' soundtracks, some classical music, or music from past games (Burnout 1 and 2, (and maybe 3, partially) have completely original music, the others some DJ-mixed cool angsty teenager rock music). The new tracks don't really appeal to me that much though. What I preferred was the classical music and the tracks from past games. Hmmm. Oh, I forgot about this, but you can switch tracks with a button press. Interesting feature.

The interface is slow. I mentioned the junkyard issues (why spend 10 unskippable seconds without any prompt on my end showing me some new vehicle ? I just want to play), and similar clunkiness rears its annoying head elsewhere during the game.

What's left then ? The copious amount of vehicles ? This isn't why I play Burnout (besides, I don't think this game has any lorries or large vehicles, it's not that varied). 

I gave up way before upgrading my driver's license (Again... What ?)... This game probably feels more like Stuntman than Burnout, perhaps someone having played both games can attest to that uneducated guess.

In summary, and I find it very sad that the comparison is so appropriate, Burnout Paradise's city is a long and occasional tedious menu, with lots of clutter and junk that spoils its space and visual appeal, and loads of crap to collect, disguised as the meat and bulk of the game. Nothing more, nothing less. Outside of that menu, there's some actual gameplay, but it's not as appealing as what other games in the series did. 

Paradise City could have been a very good game, but it was hidden away behind advertisement billboards and nonsense ramps. You get what I mean, I hope. In terms of gameplay, I think I'll keep coming back to Burnout 1, instead.

I wonder if some of the things I nitpick here were already in 3, Revenge, or Dominator. I'll have to play them at some point. They can't be as bad as this, anyway.

3/10