---
layout: post
title: "Not much 'Action', but some good writing, yeah."
published: true
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---


In Event[0], you interact through terminals with an AI that responds and adjusts to you. Unusual premise.

I think this might be a game you mightn't want to read about before playing it, if you intend to.

<!--more-->

The human you play as ends up stranded in space in some old tourist shuttle, controlled by an AI, the sole remaining inhabitant, so to speak, of this spacecraft.

Everything you do has to be done by communicating with it, opening a door, calling the elevator... You also try and piece together the events that led to the shuttle being the decrepit forgotten relic it is now by trying to get it to open up about what happened.

An experimental and rather interesting concept. Everything relies on the AI being capable of responding properly and feeling real. This is a risky endeavour.

There are a few mostly well-designed puzzles, some felt a little off though (like the somewhat odd and arbitrary hacking minigame, for instance).

The game was short, but consistently mysterious and intriguing. The way you gather and cross-reference information also feels different, thanks to the AI.

At times, it nearly felt like I was subtly communicating with it. Almost like it was its own person. A decidedly unprecedented experience, for me, anyway. I'm not accustomed to having to choose my words carefully when addressing a non-human entity. They're on to something, here. This concept is promising. This short experiment was certainly most illuminating regarding what kind of novel ideas future games could come up with.

I don't think this attempt at creating lifelike and responsive AI was a complete success though. 

But perhaps your experience and your interactions within the game might leave you with a very different aftertaste, so I'd rather leave it at that before entering spoiler territory.

## Spoiler territory

These are spoilers in terms of mechanics, rather than story. This is slightly unusual. Interesting.

While the AI's ability to interpret correctly and respond appropriately to what I was saying was overall very good and somewhat impressive, a few things left me wanting. The dev team also made few debatable design choices.

You can't do anything in this game. Pick up items, scratch your nose, ... Nothing. Apart from fiddling with terminals. Your character doesn't utter a word, doesn't make a sound, apart from the odd footstep.

I understand why this is, but, hmm. It doesn't quite fit with me. It makes the experience feel slighty surrealistic, and (I use this word too often) rather gamey, but I don't think that's what the dev team was going for, considering how lifelike they tried to make the AI.

Being unable to open a door without asking for the capricious AI's permission in a tourist space shuttle seems rather unlikely to me, but that's how things are here.

Even though it's good at responding to my prompts, it's not perfect, and depending on how you play around with it, it might feel oddly ambiguous or uncanny valley-ish. I sometimes couldn't tell if some topic I couldn't get it to expand upon was due do a limitation of its grammar parsing, or whether it was because the AI didn't want to spill the beans. This made things a little awkward and a little less immersive.

Some of the more emotional interactions with it felt a little forced. And the AI's past interactions with other humans also felt a little off. It seems like it'd rather believe a persuasive human rather than scientific calculations. Not really what a functional and logical management unit would do... ? 

(It's been a little while since I wrote the last paragraph, I can't remember what I meant exactly).

This is certainly a novelty (or something seldom seen, anyway), but I wouldn't consider this a hugely significant game. A promising concept, but not quite meaty and perfected enough for it to be gripping. The other issues I mentioned also deter from its central themes and mechanics.

I think perhaps if I'd played more games with abandoned space station settings before this one other aspects of the game would also have felt a little less fresh and exciting.