---
layout: post
title: "Lies. This Is Not A Spiritual Successor. 
"
published: true
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

It's mostly AAA gunge. There's a little Thief, maybe a little Hitman, mostly 2010s AAA mechanics.

Dishonored is mostly a sort-of FPS, you shoot bolts in guards' backs to kill/sedate them, you cut their throats or asphyxiate them, depending on 'your' morality, and whether you want the optimistic ending or not (this isn't really a spoiler, oddly enough). You also get some magic powers that make you even more powerful and hard to hit.

<!--more-->

There are some mechanics usually found elsewhere. Power upgrades, some choices here and there, items you can pick up, a few side quests. 

The gameplay ends up being pretty basic. You shoot, crouch, vault obstacles, swing your sword. Use your powers. The level design is meant to allow the player to have multiple ways of approaching most given situations.

The game feels like it's afraid the player might get lost. I got that impression it from its design. 

In the user interface. The game keeps you informed of everything. An arrow tells you how far your current objective is, even when there's no reason for you to know where it may be (eg. 'hidden' safe...). When an enemy spots you or feels something is wrong, little bolts of lightning around his head tell you he's on alert mode. Markers indicate where a lobbed grenade has landed.

When you want to interact with an object, options pop up on the screen. During loading times, messages forcefeed you gameplay tips. One of which explicitely indicates that you get a better ending if you don't kill too many. Oh ? Thanks for the spoiler. How many is too many ? No tips for that.

The game is afraid I get lost. The joys of exploration and planning are greatly diminished, as far as I'm concerned, when there's so much handholding. I don't get the impression I'm moving at my own pace, or even exploring, designers are doing it for me (which is a stark contrast compared to the original Thief game). 

No need to worry, no need to find your bearings, look. The hidden chest is right here. Look. Yes it *is* hidden, does the user interface not label it as hidden, after all ?

Part of said interface can be switched off. That was a pleasant find, and I enjoyed a short portion of the game during which the game didn't tell me where to go. Until I couldn't find the way to go.

The game isn't designed to be played without those safety nets. There's a lot of model reuse, the bland colours (pessimistic steampunk aesthetics) and the entirety of the level design are tailored to a player that lets himself be led through the levels. It's hard -and not fun- to wander aimlessly in levels without the magic arrow until one finally comes across The Path.

The level design itself is unfortunately somewhat generic. Invisible walls prevent players from exploring too much for their own good. Piranhas chew you up if you spend too much time swimming. The scale is undermined by the teleportation mechanic, which makes great heights feel mundane rather, and imposing buildings easily scaled. The city isn't daunting, there is no apprehension. No need for true caution. 

Clumsy game designers, hampering me at every turn. I never got that impression in Thief. 

The level design has other issues. Most levels are divided into several chunks, with either some large building somewhere or bottleneck obstacles separating each chunk (electric pillar thingies you have to switch off), or some bridge or long corridor separating each chunk. This feels very predictable, and doesn't make me feel the places I zip through are real.

Each section is fairly easy to traverse. Too smooth. You rush towards some poor sap facing away from you, slit his throat with one click, and teleport away. If you don't feel like it, chances are there'll be a door, the accessible first floor of a decrepit building, or some air duct you can climb up. Pretty much always (except when you're in the vicinity of one of the aforementioned bottlenecks).

Too smooth, too convenient, and too constraining. This doesn't feel like a real place. It's a bit like Half-Life 2. Too many things line up for the player, it's not random or sprawling enough, and the scale feels very wrong if you walk from one end to the other without zipping about.

I didn't find combat engaging. Throat slitting is smooth and easy, choking people till they're unconscious is tedious. Corvo doesn't feel like knocking them out in one fell swoop and a single blow. Instead, you have to approach from behind and wait several seconds for the choke animation to complete.

The AI is mediocre. Crouch or stay in the shadows, you're harder to spot. You can drop ten feet down and still make too little noise for guards to here.

Most of its AI can be summed up as 'like Thief's, but with more scripts'. Thief came out in 1998, this is a 2012 game.

And the lightning bolts, the simple shadow/noise/crouch hiding mechanic (which was more complex and ambiguous in Thief, making it more stressful) also betrays the fact that stealth games have made almost no progress since 1998 in terms of AI. Ennemies only have two or three alert levels. Hide three minutes and they forget you exist, even if you leave bodies lying around all over the place. Ennemies arbitrarily patrol levels, and tell the player everything that's going on (ie whether they think you've gone or not, when they're on alert). The only noticeable improvements are little details, like a guard stopping in front of a painting to briefly inspect it.

Again, these were all design problems that existed fifteen years before Dishonored. It has made no substantial improvements on Thief, and its level design is, in my opinion, noticeably inferior.

Psychic powers ? I can only remember teleportation, which, while useful, did change the game's scale. The other powers I recall nothing about, not even what they do (there might have been a regeneration one). They were probably empowering.

Those powers were bestowed upon us by some random mysterious dude. His reasons remain unclear. It's a little arbitrary and feels like an excuse and justification for you to have those powers more than a real plot device woven into the narrative.

The story felt lackluster. Not particularly engaging, and a little shoddy. Corvo never speaks, which, considering how impactful he is on the game's events, and how good he is at collecting information, is really jarring... If he had been able to speak and not been so initially passive, there's no way the story would have taken such turns. 

There appear to be only two competent inventors in the whole city. Full of themselves, they gabble about various topics. Science doesn't work that way, and neither would steampunk science.

I also don't like the fact that NPCs record messages in audiographs. They aren't soldiers, or working in a spacestation. They don't need to keep any logs. Their only purpose is for the player to learn about them. They have no proper place in this world. Similarly, books mostly give you general information about the city, which again, feels very odd. Why would a general have a book that only contains information that must be blatantly obvious for him in his personal drawer ? One of the logs also helps Corvo compromise a major antagonist. Why on earth would such a log exist in the first place ?

This makes no sense, and feels very player-centric, since the book can only ever serve the player. It also removes any sense of mystery, puzzlement or wonder the world might provide.

Again, the original Thief did a much better job at building places with meaning and purpose, at making the player feel like an intruder and a part of this world. Garrett feels no need to provide explanations as to why things are as they are, and therefore doesn't, which makes a lot more sense. It also leaves some things open to interpretation, for the player to ponder on, and is a lot more immersive.

So, essentially, a 'spiritual successor' to Thief that solves none of its shortcomings, and everything else is underwhelming, with modern AAA handholding and player-empowering design. None of the ambiguity, the stress, the rush of adrenalin after a really close shave. Here, you teleport away after an umpteenth throat slitting swan dive, and choose between climbing the air duct or going through the courtyard. 

3/10