---
layout: post
title: "No one gets to know what's outside the cave. Yours truly, Nintendo"
published: true
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

No particular expectations when 'booting up' this game. It's been a while since I've played a Japanese RPG (FFIV 5-6 years prior ?) and I'd never played a Mario RPG.

My lips curled into a small smile pretty quickly.

Compared to the average Mario game, this one initially feels slightly audacious.

<!--more-->

First off, the paper art. It's cute, gives this game an identity separate from the platform games. It provides a sense of being that's pretty different from most games I've played, initially, anwyay. That being said, it's a sequel, so perhaps I wouldn't be so enthused had I played the first one.

Next, its universe. Mario arrives at some shady seaside port called Rogueport. Characters interact with Your Favourite Red And Blue Plumber (tm) and have some personality. Nothing like Sunshine or Galaxy and their almost non-existent secondary characters. It's quite nice. I get the faint impression Nintendo wants to take me someplace with this game.

The combat system is interesting. No 9999s, no stats porn. Instead, an engaging skill-based interactive (both during your turn and the opponent's) system, with a little humour sprinkled in. The badge system is also an extra layer that felt like an incentive to experiment without being too pushy.

I remember levelling in FFIV got boring. Not so here. Progression felt natural enough for it not be necessary. I actually occasionally walked into fights I'd rather have avoided since I didn't need the experience, which did start to get a little irksome near the end.

Allies each have some unique power that can help you out out of combat as well. The related puzzles are pretty easy, and feel a bit artificial.

But the overall setting and mechanics set this Mario game apart from the platformers. Which made my time with this game worthwhile.

However, one aspect disappointed me considerably... 

I was happy with the way the story was going. Finally, *something* is going on in the Mario universe. Mario is going to show us he has other things going on in his life, that he isn't simply Peach's constant bodyguard (servant ? Minion ?), and that, well, y'know, he isn't simply a shallow sprite with a hat and mustach due to sprite size constraints on the NES...

I believed this game would provide something different, that Nintendo would take some liberties with its characters. Rogueport is charming, and we encounter some colourful people. Mario's allies have something driving them, something to prove. All this suggests that the plot might not be fated to a predictable conclusion. That there could be light of a different colour at the end of this bright tunnel.

I'm not saying the characters and story aren't flawed. It's all a bit naive. Some situations feel forced, and not every character is interesting, but again, perhaps we're onto a little something here.

Unfortunately, after having teased me with this possibility of evolution for the character, Nintendo failed to deliver. No risqué games on their watch. Nope nope nope. Mario has a reputation to uphold, and expectations need to be met...

Mario does not care about this universe. He nods at characters that ask for help because he's a hero cliché, and any other option would be detrimental to the character's image (to his *brand*, even) and consequently to Nintendo's appeal to younger gamers. He doesn't nod simply because he wants to help them. Not all the time, anyway.

Mario sleepwalks through this intriguing (though not devoid of annoying Japanese RPG drawbacks and stereotypes) world without so much as glancing at it. No eyelashes batted. As the story progresses and secondary characters stopped popping up and started to fade away in the background, my interest in this game wavered, and subsequently waned and petered out.

I had a feeling I knew what to expect. The plot wasn't driving me any more. The game felt more and more hollow. Sequences during which one controls Bowser or Peach felt unnecessary, pointless. And I know what's going to happen, it's written all over Mario's almost expressionless face.

He only cares about Peach, that's all there is to him. That's it. Why else would he subject himself to all this ? He's not here for new companionship or to take pictures. Nintendo built a promising setting, introduced characters that are coldly tossed aside at the end of the game because in the end Mario saves Peach and then buggers off. This isn't a spoiler. Anything else is not worth dwelling over, and God forbid Mario or Peach *change*. 

Nintendo made me spend 30-35 hours in a universe that gets written off immediately afterwards, and I realise I lived an illusion. 

There were so many directions Nintendo could have gone with this. These unique individuals he encountered could have shaped the character a little further, or at least the universe been something that he'd come back to. But no. No fucks given. 

This is filler.

(I discussed this by talking mostly about Mario, but this also applies to Bowser and Peach, of course).

Wind Waker wasn't like this. Link was no longer the stereotypical, uh, little kid who gets sent to oblivion to save some princess without asking any questions. He had purpose, he had a life, you could feel his anger. This was personal, and there was a slight sense of self-exploration as well for the character. The maritime universe isn't cast aside, either. Not entirely. 

Mario, however, remains this unchanging hero stereotype, and in a game which makes you peek at something more, Nintendo decided otherwise. Again, this is filler. There is no reason for Paper Mario 2 to exist.

Peach kidnapped. Mario go save Peach. Hey look, paper, people talking. Pirates. Hehe. Mario no give shit. Mario think of Peach, only of Peach. No talk with friendly shroom. Mario on drugs throughout whole game. 

You get the impression at the end of the game when he recounts the story for his brother that he's describing a dream he just had. 

I didn't dislike this. Again, this was a reasonably interesting take on RPGs with an initially off-beat story (for a game with Mushroom Kingdom protagonists). But the disappointment and frustration throughout the second half haunt me. I spent 30 hours thinking I was playing a genuine Mario RPG, and it turned out to be an RPG'd Super Mario Bros.

Ten years ago I would have loved this. Now, I understand why I slowly moved away from most Marios and Zeldas. I want more than what those games provide. This game here is a pseudo-platformer from the brand known as Mario. I got a fleeting glimpse (unintentional ? Deliberate ?) of what might lie outside the cave, and Nintendo embarrassed, closed the opening on my dazzled face.

I should have expected this, you might think. I'm naive. You're probably right. Well, I don't think the other RPGs featuring Mario and friends are going to be any more satisfying. I'll have to pass.