---
layout: post
title: "THIS WEIRD GAME BUT INTERESTING IMO MAYBE ?!? MAYBE ??"
published: true
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

I like the late 90s and early 2000s. Lots of dated games I wouldn't bother playing, but a period rife with technological innovations, narrative and gameplay experimentation of all sorts. Exciting new takes and breakthroughs. Enough processing power to start creating very complex worlds and systems.

And odd games you wouldn't see today from big mainstream teams. Sacrifice, Giants : Citizen Kabuto, Anachronox, these wouldn't make it past preproduction nowadays. I've no idea how even back then people thought Giants : Citizen Kabuto would appeal to enough niche players to recoup its development cost.

<!--more-->
 
In Giants : Citizen Kabuto, you start off as some alien schmuck with a blaster and jetpack looking for his friends, after crashlanding on some unknown island planet while they were on their way to slack off at some touristey hotspot. Interactions with some of the locals lead to them helping you out, but you need to protect them from another species, the Reapers, who're also armed.

The game is light-hearted and goes for a lot of slapstick silly humour. It certainly doesn't take itself seriously.

Levels are very large. The island is rugged, filled with smaller islands with steep slopes, a few trees and buildings, amidst huge bodies of water.

The mechanics slowly expand over time ; it becomes a group expedition (a posse ?) as more of your friends join up with you, and you can order them about. The game then shifts towards an RTS hybrid, as in some levels you get to build a base and a few buildings with the aliens' help, and seek to destroy the enemy base.

The RTS sections include some mildly annoying backtracking, but was certainly an unexpected change of pace.

The surprises don't end there. After a cutscene you abruptly switch characters, and end up controlling a reaper princess (a female blue sort of mermaid, with no clothes on. She wasn't sexualised like the way other female characters often are, curiously. Again, games like this wouldn't exist today). She has no jetpack but can swim, has different weapons, and can use a few spells, including one which speedily propels you across large distances. She unlocks new spells as time goes by, and later on, you end up with more RTS sections. There are also a few jetski races.

After that, you switch characters *again*, and play as Kabuto, a giant creature that eats little aliens to grow even bigger and squashes buildings by kicking them. Kabuto can lay eggs, which'll hatch into wolve-like creatures that'll chew anything in their path.

Hmm... yeah, it feels odd describing the game like this. A video (or reading through the rather detailed manual) would provide a better idea of what the game feels like.

It's quite peculiar, which suits me fine. The humor (which didn't always ring with me, but the happy-go-lucky attitude of the protagonists was appealing throughout), the odd setting, odd mix of gameplay genres, that shifted over time, and the huge levels. I expect this game would be quite fun to play with friends.

It hasn't aged as well as others, though. Cutscenes and dialogues are a little clunky. I mentioned there was some backtracking, but the jetski races were also rather underwhelming. Some of these issues were likely due to technical constraints, but in any case this game's age shows a fair bit. 

What struck me while playing this was the sense of scale. Levels are huge, and depending on which part of the game you're in, their scale and the way you move around in that space feel very different.

The jetpack alien guys move slowly, but are able to travel large distances over time. Hills and mountains do feel impressive and require some forethought to be scaled appropriately. The jetpacks sometimes and the look of the hills and mountains make it feel vaguely reminescent of Tribes, at times.

The blue princess lady feels very different. She swims slowly, whereas the other twerps would get eaten by piranhas and avoided water as much as possible. Her propulsion spell enables her to travel greater distances far more quickly than a jetpack, changing the feel of the levels drastically. Distant places don't seem so distant anymore ; the giant leaps I often found myself making with her meant I was more often airborne and very high up, gazing down at vast surfaces. 

The game is graphically quite basic, (but full of character), even for the time, but the draw distances are very large, which means one sees much more of the scenery when high up than in most games, and is allowed to jump or boost much higher.

Kabuto feels different again. Buildings look tiny and are easily destroyed. It's easy to jump up hills that aren't very steep. Enemies look puny and individually are little more than mere bugs that can be flattened with a flick of the toe. Less time is spent airborne, and looking at the ground from above feels different.

The huge scale of the traversed expanses of land and water, and the imposing height of some of those mountains also meant levels felt very open. I felt very free in terms of movement, mostly being constrained by the cooldown on jetpacks, and the speed at which characters could press forward.


I have no idea who might want to play this today. I didn't know what to expect in this game, and it's a little rough around some of its edges, and decidedly bizarre. I would certainly love to play more games that play around with size and scale as much as this one did. Unique settings and intriguing puzzling places like the planet island in this game also feel like they could have more to offer players and designers.