---
layout: post
title: "Lingering shadow, uninterrupted lack of light"
published: true
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

Perpetual obscurity, everlasting pitch blackness, unbroken lightlessness... Hmm. Nah, they probably chose a better title.

I got lucky and came across a 10-euro copy of this (which is quite rare, nowadays).

I'm a scaredy cat, horror games aren't my thing. I played this with Maratz watching (and another for part of the playthrough). Eternal's Darkness's reputation and originality made me want to try it out.

<!--more-->

And it was worth my time, I think. Many ideas people seemed to laud in other games as new and creative were already present in this less well-known game. I don't know where this one borrowed from, but its storytelling and mechanics are noteworthy.

The story is a little erratically explained. The player controls several different characters in different time periods, all involved in a struggle to prevent one of the malevolent Ancients from being summoned into our world.

The game's atmosphere is great, in my opinion. Characters run around with smooth animations in magnificent buildings. Level builders and artists seemed to pay special attention to architecture, and to the 'inhuman' feel of some places. Creatures are gruesome, bizarre and intriguing. The unsettling and sometimes gothic soundtrack, and powerful sound design, and the well-written lovecraftian descriptions (often, but not always focusing more so on suggested or perceived horror than actual depicted monstrosities) all reinforce this feeling of having found oneself in a disquieting, foreign and potentially hostile universe.

Alex Roivas, the main character, ties the story together. She starts investigating what happened to her grandfather, who died gruesomely alone in his mansion. She learns new spells and abilities every time a new page in the Eternal Darkness tome is found, and each find causes a new flashback and temporary character switch. I like some of those characters. One doesn't learn that much about them, but Alex is strong-willed and has guts.

Each character has unique animations and characteristics (health, sanity, magic, endurance, ...) which change the game's feel slightly every time there's a switch. Some are fast and tire quickly, have lots of magic. Others are bulky and slow but never tire (huh), and their sanity bar is not as big, for instance.

The magic meter slowly fills up over time if you keep moving. The sanity bar slowly empties the more you encounter monsters, but can be repleted slightly if you kill them off with a flashy cathartic move. After a little while in the game, a spell that allows to heal health and sanity will be available.

To use a spell, the corresponding runes are necessary, and then you need to know (or guess) which sequence of runes to use, and which deity to colour the spell with. 

Other spells enchant your weapon, provide a shield, or help solve little puzzles. There's a blue-green-red rock-paper-scissors relationship between each Ancient One, affecting spell colour choice. A choice of colour for an artefact picked up at the start of the game determines which Ancient One you'll have to fight in your playthrough. Green means creatures will reduce your sanity further, red, your health, blue, your magic. This noticeably affects combat and puzzles. I had to fight the green schmuck, the easiest one, supposedly.

Some smug schoolchild added a black hole (or meteorite or well of whatever) to the rock-paper-scissors trinity. A sort-of fourth Ancient provides more powerful magic if you can find his items. I didn't.

Each monster has its peculiarities, and awareness of those helps you out in fights. You have firearms, bladed weapons and spells. You can choose which body part to aim at (an idea which Dead Space reprised), dismembering enemies or beheading them.

Let your sanity bar drop too low, and your character will start hallucinating. These hallucinations are... interesting. I didn't realise ED had those, and was occasionally caught offguard.

There were lots of little details I appreciated in this game : the weapon and animation variety, the properties of certain spells, having to walk slowly so as not to alert some enemies, some of the hallucinations, the claustrophobia or agoraphobia that the game tried to make me feel through the scenery and camera angles.

A lot of time was spent on the carefully-crafted atmosphere and setting. That alone, as well as the noteworthy mechanics make this game at the very least an interesting piece of atmospheric horror game history, and an experience which I found appealing.

Mechanically, it has issues, which have also aged badly.

The puzzles aren't very deep, and a couple were very counter-intuitive for me and stumped me for a good while. I also once or twice had no idea what I was supposed to do and ended up wandering aimlessly for a good half-hour. Combat, as original as it was, also ended up becoming a repetitive chore.

The last chunk of the game also includes a lot of forced backtracking, for seemingly no other reason than to make the game an extra hour longer... The last chunks of the game require you to activate eight or nine different runes, and make you run through the same areas and use the same spells each time. This wasn't too exciting a buildup.

I liked the stamina mechanic, but characters having to rest every ten seconds also got a little tedious. If there were less backtracking, it might have been less of an issue.

There were a couple of traps that are likely to kill you the first time around, too... Not the kind of design choice I'd personally make.

The true ending requires the player to complete the game three times, once per artifact colour. Meaning you have to suffer through thrice the backtracking. A curious gimmick, but I can't be bothered to finish the game three times.

All in all, I deem this game to be an interesting piece of gaming history. The atmosphere is well-done, but the mechanics end up detracting from the atmosphere. My initial curiosity ended up partially turning into boredom, with a dash of light frustration.