---
layout: post
title: "How not to design an open-world : a Lesson in"
published: true
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

I've written some reviews of the first two Witcher games as well (in French). I'll upload them sometime, and maybe translate them into English (and this one into French) at some point.

<!--more-->

I sometimes make the assumption the reader has played all 3 entries in the series, but it shouldn't be an issue following along most of this review. I haven't read the novels.

If you haven't read my reviews, well, to put it succinctly, I wasn't particularly fond of the first two games. I thought they got a LOT of things wrong. Though I do look at the first game in the series in a kinder light. It's raw, it has an interesting atmosphere, and feels very cold towards the player, which is definitely refreshing. It also doesn't feel as Western as the next two games in the series. Different pacing, culture and myths. Few overused D&D clichés.

But bland combat, a tepid storyline full of bullshit telegraphed plot devices plague those games. They are also surprisingly lacking in dialogue, characters are mostly one-dimensional and very loosely fleshed out, you traipse in a repetitive fashion through the same areas over and over again, ...

There were some aspects of those games that I enjoyed enough to still be mildly interested in the franchise (the setting, mostly), and the Wild Hunt's slightly different approach with its open-world made me think I might enjoy it a bit more. That, and the fact that [Tevis Thompson](http://tevisthompson.com/the-existential-art/) appeared to have some good things to say about its world...

Well, it took me four months to finish the damn game, and I didn't play anything after that for quite a while. It put me off playing other stuff. Bleh.

There's a lot that's wrong with this game, and it's so vast it's hard to know where to get started.


## Setting and continuity within the series


The game starts at Kaer Morhen, the place the Witchers of the school which Geralt is a part of whose name I've forgotten often spend the winter in.

You wake up in Yennefer's bed, and then get to slowly walk down some stairs and engage in some shallow dialogue with Ciri and Vesemir, in a poorly disguised tutorial.

## Tutorial

Actually, let's briefly mention the tutorial. I think it was optional, but some of the controls weren't quite intuitive to me, and so I suffered through it. I very much dislike pop-up messages that interrupt the game just to tell you something that is most of the time really obvious, and only seldom actually useful. It's jarring, irritating and anger-inducing in a really unique way. I am a pretty calm person, and only shoddy design in video games seems to be able to get me this annoyed.

I think many games get away with it because it's only the introduction, it's lazy design so can save time compared to well-fleshed out and proper built-in-the-experience tutorials (and less risky than a game manual). Since it's only a short chunk of the game, designers know it will therefore likely 'be forgiven' and possibly forgotten, even if it was annoying. 

And they get their message through to the slower players about the controls, or those players that the designers couldn't find a way to connect with through other means, even if it was a very poorly delivered and annoyingly patronising message. 

I don't like it. It seems to be a decision that sacrifices some enjoyment and immersion for just about every player. For what purpose ? Safety. Let's not get our players confused. Hey look, this is a ladder. There might be some backlash otherwise. 

Who suffers from it ? Ultimately, the players. I don't think that is a good design philosophy to make a good game. Even if it might help prevent day 1 backlash. This is the same sort of philosophy that puts enjoyment in a free-to-play game behind a paywall, except here the cost is your time. You're also probably going to make things harder on yourself for the next game. Whiners will expect a clear tutorial which you'll have to water down and spoonfeed like you did here, and potential backlash will be even more biting if you mess up.

And the constant interruptions meant I was mostly distracted from Vesemir's actual in-game explanations. I didn't even properly learn some of the combat moves, and also because I was Not Amused. So the tutorial STILL failed. I may not be blameless, perhaps, but that doesn't excuse the game.

No. This matters. And I *didn't* forget. This tutorial was terrible game design. What a poor introduction to and first impression of the game.

Anyway, let's get back on topic...

## Setting and continuity within the series


Who the fuck is Ciri ? Why is Yennefer here ?

I played the first couple of games two years ago. Yennefer is vaguely mentioned once or twice, but amnesiac Geralt doesn't give a damn about her. Ciri is pretty much never mentioned. 

Why are they suddenly essential to the storyline ? It's jarring. Pieces are missing. Newfound unfamiliarity with a universe can have its charms, but the promise of continuity laid out by the first two games conflicts with it. There is some sense to the fact that Geralt with his recently recovered memories might start taking an interest in these characters again, but *not once* did Zoltan and Dandelion or Triss or whoever think to mention Geralt had a foster daughter in the first two games... ?

Another frustrating thing about the series in general is that CD Projekt decided to void some of the choices the player might have made in the previous games.

You chose to stick with Shani ? Aaaaaw, too bad, Shani doesn't appear in the sequel and you end up being accompanied by Triss throughout instead. And the 'major choice' you make in *that* game (which was very forced and unnecessary from what I recall) has only little tangible impact in Wild Hunt.

And yeah, you wake up in Yennefer's bed at the start of Wild Hunt. But fear not, Triss will pop up again, and you can reset your relationship with her to whatever YOU want it to be in Game Of The Year 2015.

This isn't player choice. This isn't continuity. This is CD Projekt being afraid that players will feel unable to bear the consequences of their actions, and turning some of their characters into player-centric soulless playthings to make sure the player feels empowered through choice. And the gap between the 'player choice' that part of the series' marketing was built around, and the actual impact of your actions ingame is, uh, gaping.

It's kind of the same for Geralt. No matter how you built him in the previous games, you start this one with very little carried over from the first two games and can decide to make something radically different with your skill tree.

So yeah, continuity ? Not in my GOTY.

Actually, there's more to that aspect, too.

Previously, available distractions were poker dice, and fisticuffs. Assassin of Kings introduced arm wrestling, and the first game had drinking contests.

In Wild Hunt, everyone appears to have ditched the dice and arm wrestling for... A card game... ? With characters from the game as cards... ? Expensive cards which an average peasant might sometimes own but not some wealthy lord ? Who makes these cards ? What happened to the die ? Did everyone learn how to read ?

The answer to that is obvious. CD Projekt wanted to cash in on the card game trend with their franchise. Immersion and setting coherence are secondary to GWENT marketing, apparently.

These things might not be as much of an issue if you've only played Wild Hunt, but having played the whole series, I can't really let that slide so easily.

## Story stuff

The story in Wild Hunt is... Eh, it has its ups-and-downs, let's put it that way. I got slowly bored. A lot of it feels artificial, and once again I feel like Geralt could have avoided several problems by acting preemptively and less passively. Witcher neutrality, my arse. He spouted that several times in the first couple of games and spent most of the time proving the exact opposite. Besides, doing nothing is also a stance.

Some characters I felt were interesting enough (Dijkstra, for instance). I liked the other witchers all right. Other characterss... Not so interesting. Looking at you here, Ciri.

To be honest, I can't be bothered to talk about the story that much. If you spend 80 hours in an open-world game, only 10% of it will actually be story. And you can forget about the plot for 40 hours and it'll wait for you, anyway. It was forgettable, new plot points, locations and characters are introduced in a noticeably paced fashion, with soppy awkward romance moments if you care to opt for them. Animations are very clean, lipsynch and voice-acting are alright, but the writing is mediocre at times ("Geralt ! It's a trap !"), and the game does throw some dumb stuff at you. Most of the last chunk of the game felt very sloppy, the Wild Hunt characters shallow or silly, and the father-daughter stuff rather contrived. Random references to works like the Lord of the Rings felt very forced and unnatural. I think those should have been dispensed with. They occasionally took me out of the game.

And like its predecessors, the game lacks dialogue in some ways. There's plenty of exposition, sure, but many many characters have nothing much to say beyond what might immediately interest Geralt, or major plot stuff. You might end up doing things that might affect them, and find that no new dialogue options appear to reflect that. Zoltan and Dandelion don't seem to care for your adventures or that you might need help, outside the prearranged plot moments where you interact with them.

Anyway, that's about it from me for the story this time around. Play the first game or some NWN mod if you want some deeper stuff.

## Geralt gameplay

I'll only touch on a couple of things even though I wasn't that enthralled by many of the mechanics because the game is vast and the core issues that really bugged me mostly reside in the world design.

Combat is... I can't actually remember much about it. I mostly recall joking about The Power Of The Left-Click. Well, to be fair, I do remember a couple of things. I think I only learned to dodge or parry after 20 hours of play or so during a fistfight, and until that point was mostly mashing left-click. I also recall killing the final enemy solely by mashing left-click, which was rather pathetic. So not terribly interesting or engaging, but not too frustrating either. The annoying backstabbing mechanics and silly hit and roll sequences from the previous game are gone, thankfully.

## Ciri gameplay sections, with a silky smooth and unexpected transition to the game's world design issues

We actually control Ciri at some points during the game. Geralt spends most of the game chasing after her (in a rather protracted and unconvincing fashion, too), and occasional bits of discussion or events lead to flashbacks during which we get to play her.

Her gameplay is simpler than Geralt's (fewer powers), and the level design during those chunks of gameplay is *extremely* linear. Compared to the openness of Geralt sections, it's -again( very jarring. The fact that the only times we control Ciri happen to be the only portions of the map that are surrounded by cliffs and non-climbable areas doesn't help make me feel immersed, nor does it make me believe in the world as a physically coherent place.

My gripes with the world don't stop there, unfortunately.

Geralt can still loot any house he enters with no consequence whatsoever (except in the cities, where if a guard notices you're in trouble). You can rob people in blind daylight and the Witcher universe doesn't care about it. Similarly, Witcher potions recipes (which are 'well-kept secrets', this is mentioned multiple times in the series) can be found at ye random apothicary...

Those two issues were also present in the previous game (and the first one in The Witcher 1 as well, but I believe that one did make recipes rare and hard to find), so they aren't specifically related to the open-world design.

## Major open-world design issues

This open open-world world felt quite pleasant to romp around in during the first few hours. Not exhilarating, but the sense of exploration was definitely there. People mention a couple of events as you walk past, you encounter a travelling merchant, explore some fields on horseback and clear a thieves' den. Neat stuff.

I also remember coming across some really strong monster and getting wrecked. Oh, damn, it feels like the world doesn't care about me. I'm a speck of dust in a sandstorm. A simple being in a world that isn't built around me, a world which I'm but a part of. This is nice. Maybe this game won't be as player-empowering and player-centric as the previous one.

Very quickly though, exploration starts to feel unrewarding. Everything you see has stamps or markers on it. You glimpse a chest in the distance, but before you reach it, a pop-up icon tells you there's a 'secret area' nearby, and indicates in on the map. When you happened to miss the chest, this becomes a rather annoying spoiler.

Besides, where's the joy in exploration if the game does it for you ? How is a secret chest 'secret' if it's an icon on the map ?

It gets worse, too. 

The environment is rather samey throughout. Some areas differ slightly (and city houses are different from those in the countryside), but not enough that you can find your way within each of them without requiring the map. And the various villages you come across, while they all have names, *give you no way of finding out that name without using your map*. Actually, this isn't quite true. The name flashes on the screen when you approach the area. But the signposts are written in some foreign writing. Outside of those villages, you will get lost very quickly most of the time.

The map requires you to go through a menu, by the way. Which takes about a second to display, every single time.

So you need to enter a menu every time you want to find your bearings. And you VERY OFTEN NEED to find your bearings with those helper tools, because the places aren't distinctive. You don't get the sort of visual cues or landmarks that you might find in actual places, or -from what I gather, haven't played it- in a game with a better sense of space like [BOTW](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vJimNslI3gg).

And when people tell you to go somewhere in TW3, they generally don't tell you how to get there with directions or coherent pointers. Nope, you need to use the map or compass.

This made me feel that I wouldn't be able to learn to navigate this world comfortably, at my own pace. Very frustrating. You quickly unlock a 'fast travel' option, likely implemented as a workaround to this fundamental world-building issue, which only serves to further disconnect you from the world Geralt -and the player- is supposed to be a part of.

Of course, since you can't find your bearings, it means you pretty much HAVE to follow quest markers instead of relying on directions. This means you either have to use your map, or rely on the compass. Map menuing was annoying, and the compass is essentially a yellow arrow you follow like a thick numbskull. It's like a smartphone GPS, and when you get to wherever the fuck you were going you've completely forgotten how you got there. You never plan things, you never really have to take a step back and *think* about how to get there, either. And the game doesn't really enable you to. You simply go wherever the yellow arrow points to.

When you track stuff down, you essentially follow a red path thanks to The Power Of Right-Click. Amazing gameplay. Instead of following a yellow arrow, you follow a red smudge on the screen. So deep and engaging. Doesn't feel gamey and patronising at all. Really. 

Oh, and when you walk off the edge of the map Geralt spouts some inane one-liner and you get teleported back further inland. Invisible walls.

So immersive. Perfect open-world design in the GOTY of the year 2015.

You can't climb some surfaces, you can only climb very specific spots which ALL look the same. It feels really gamey and arbitrary (but it's better than Assassin of Kings in that regard, since you can still walk and ride up a lot of slopes, it doesn't feel quite as binary). You also can't burn or bash wooden doors down, too. Neither with The Power of Fireball, nor with The Force.

I understand that some of these design problems aren't easy to solve, but I don't think that should be an excuse. Not with the amount of time and resources poured into this game. From what I gather (again, I haven't played it yet), [games like Zelda:BOTW](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vJimNslI3gg) deal with landmarks, map exploration, climbing and feeling like you're part of the world in a much much better fashion than GOTY TW3:WH does.

The levelling system is also very awkward. It feels really arbitrary. You can't use some weapons and items until you're at the right level for no apparent reason other than gamey game-balancing and pacing. You encounter level 5 Griffins you make short work of, and level 29 ones that two-shot you, but they look no different from each other. How is this consistent ? How can I not feel the hand of the level or gameplay designer all over the place, the holding hand that wants me to explore but is too scared I'll get lost and doesn't want me to find things at my own pace ? The one that said this monster is level 7 but this one is level 30 ? Why couldn't they look and *feel* different ?

Why can't I lose track of my horse ? It'd be my own fault for not taking care of my steed properly. How does her teleporting to my location whenever I whistle constitute a good immersive mechanic ?

The problems still don't stop there.

Geralt is a witcher. Witchers are not trusted by most people, they're shunned, considered to be outcasts and suspicious weirdos with snake-eyes, and are only really called upon if there's a desperate need to bash some rampaging monster on the head. Some NPCs (those part of the ambient scenery) occasionally insult you as you walk past, so the game makes a point of reminding you you can never be like the others, living a peaceful social everyday life. Which is nice.

Why then, does every single village open its doors to Geralt ? You've never unwelcome. No one tells you to go away. No village decides to take matters into its own hands to avoid having to deal with a witcher. People rush towards you eagerly to spout their samey dialogue asking for help.

And when I stop and think about it, there's another massive inconsistency with WH's world :
*Everyone* outside the city is going to die within the next decade or so.

Let me explain. There's an ongoing war. Many dead. Almost every village has to deal with at least two different monsters killing people (and as I was saying, they're all presented with the same amount of dialogue, similar bartering options, ... so it feels very samey and gamey even if the questbearers sometimes have different personalities). And then there are all the other non-quest-related monsters prowling around. Plus the epic monsters with those blasted quest marker thingies that tell you there's a reward if you kill them. And bandits, too.

So if, say, 10% of the population died in the wars, and 15% or so died from monster attacks, how many able young men and women does that leave to protect the villages ? I mean, if they all desperately need a witcher at the same time, how hostile does that make this world ? Why do they let the kids wander about outside in those conditions ?

(Oh, and where do Vernon Roche's soldiers find food ?)

Geralt isn't simply looking for Ciri. He's preventing an entire country from being wiped out by monsters. Who needs a Wild Hunt when the actual fauna is so savage and dangerous ? Game designers need to spend more time outside, and understand that nature isn't inherently hostile.

On top of being very inconsistent, this reliance on witchers also makes the game feel very player-centric. Half the world knows who you are and calls you White Wolf, even though there's no reason for them to know you (and knowing who you are doesn't prevent common bandits from thinking they stand a chance against you and attacking you like idiots though). Every single village needs your help. There isn't a single one that's doing alright. If you hadn't walked through those villages what would have happened to them ? 

Every place has a purpose for the player. It's either a quest-giving place, a plot point, a 'hidden'-treasure-place or a bandit hideout. Every village has a GWENT player, who presumably plays mostly by himself, given that walking to another village probably spells a short and grisly death.

It's a darn shame that the world-building is such a mess because once I got past the tutorial with Ciri (which presumably also serves to try and make you care about her, just like her gameplay sequences, since before that you've no real clue who she is), the way the game opened itself up to the player was quite promising. But when the game lasts 80 hours or so, you kind of want this enjoyment to last beyond those few opening hours. 

And consistency matters. Much as I enjoyed playing GWENT in this game it still felt hollow and shoehorned into the world.

(GWENT was a really welcome break from the game, actually. At first, I enjoyed it much more than I thought I would. I spent several hours of the game riding from one village to another, looking for GWENT players. Geralt was a professional player for a while, looking for some competition. Monsters and quests were only nuisances that were to be ignored or dealt with until the next opponent could show up. Ultimately though, the game started feeling empty, the AI exploitable, the game balance flawed. Beating some AI with cards I had little control over was never all that exciting. As is, it fails both as a stand-alone concept and as a component of Wild Hunt's world.)

## Random tidbits

I don't like the concept of DLC for most games, I think it's generally bad for immersion and world building. Ross from Ross's Game Dungeon made some good points about DLC when analysing [Deus Ex](https://youtu.be/rxOKEsBx4NU?t=527) and [Strife](https://youtu.be/oPrU7LSqiX0?t=548). I don't care that there's more content for the players in this kind of game if it feels tacked on and gamey.

Sex was, uh, cringey at times. Uncanny Valley stuff. I don't recall it being presented as a quest reward, so it wasn't as immature and shallow as the first game in that regard, I don't remember too much about it.

## Final notes

Anyway, yeah. I didn't like that game very much even though it seemed promising at first, and the blasted thing took me 80 hours to finish. I spent 80 hours following a yellow dot on a compass. Woaw. Amazing.

Play Breath of The Wild, or Morrowind, or Neverwinter Nights, or Deus Ex, or Daggerfall, or something, instead. Or the first game, if you really want to play a Witcher game. You'll get what I deem to be a better experience, and maybe in some cases a glimpse of how interesting open-world games could be, if we stopped praising unsuccessful attempts like Wild Hunt.

Wild Hunt fails at crafting a believable space. And how can I expect to stay engaged for dozens of hours in the political drab (but remember, Witchers are neutral) and generic AAA combat if I don't believe in the world I'm supposed to be a part of ?
