---
layout: post
title: "The real Man With No Name"
published: true
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

Arx Fatalis is a pretty raw experience.

After a confusing opening cutscene, in which some old dude dies and you sort of ascertain that you're in an underground world because the sentient species were forced to retreat underground to survive, you're dumped in some goblin jail. The initial couple of hours introduce you to some of the mechanics, but you don't really get to know where you are (and who you are) for a little while longer.

<!--more-->

So here you are, roaming about in this openworld first-person medieval fantasy dungeon crawler-y adventure game, which gives you quite a bit of freedom in approaching situations. 
At the start, you build some skillsets, and determine if you're going to be an all-rounder, a caster, a brawler or an archer. Thief skills are also available, amongst other things. Rather unusually though, the thief skills aren't enough to get by, and magic is pretty much compulsory. You will get some unavoidable fights, and some puzzles require you to use magic. You can use scrolls if your magic skills aren't up to par, but this definitely felt like a different take compared to most fantasy games of the sort. 

The way one cast magic is a bit wonky. You can only cast spells by combining runes in your possession, and to cast them, you need to draw these runes with the mouse. It's clunky, the rune detection struggles to tell some runes apart, making it at times a chore (and very risky to use in combat, even more so when the mana pool is limited), but with practice I got to understand some of the quirks and lower the failure rate for most of those runes. You can store three spells and quickcast them though, meaning you still get to use them them in combat.

The feeling you get roaming around this eight-layered underground world is great. You have no clue where you're going a lot of the time. Sometimes you come across stairs that lead downwards, but something about them feels off. You could go there, but, well... you don't know what's down there. Oh shit, there's this strong rat-like teleporting creature thingey that gives me the hands. Uuuuuh, all right, maybe I'll come back later. Runes are hard to come by. Caves are disquieting, feel cold and uninviting. The sound of your footsteps changes a lot depending on your stealth skills, and the surface you walk on, and the general lack of music causes you to become all that more aware of them, and of how loud you must sound in those echoing caves. Some of those creatures feel a little different. You don't know where you truly stand with the ones that don't attack you on sight.

Early on, you're frail. Every encounter is a life-and-death situation. Once you get to the human city though, things change a little. You meet more people, are given tasks and a purpose, later on, you recover your memory. The game's events -not its world, but the overarching narrative- starts to center around the player more. You aren't just some half-naked squirt that woke up on a soggy dungeon floor and learned how to make a puny spark with runes anymore. You quickly become humanity's last hope yadda yadda. Some of the mystery wears off. 

But that's also when the world opens up the most. Suddenly, you have access to pretty much the whole eight layers of underground. There are huge chunks of the game you don't need to go to till much much later, or don't need to visit at all in some cases. There's a crypt that takes up perhaps about a fifth or so of the whole map, and it's completely optional. 

This isn't quite your typical fantasy game world, either. There are some weird snake-like creatures that seem to hold a lot of sway. There's a level inhabited by dwarves, but it turns out they're all dead.

The underground layout also adds some consistency to some of the obstacles that initially prevent you from exploring further. No invisible walls here. A cave-in is a cave-in, nothing I can do about it. Passageways leading downwards are scarce, and often guarded or in dangerous areas. If the orc in the doorway doesn't recognise your mug, why should he let you in ? You've no reason to be there.

Runes, despite how impactful they are to your gameplay and exploration, are pretty hard to come by. There were a couple I didn't find in my playthrough, and that meant there were some spells I couldn't cast.

Combat is clunky. With my shitty all-rounder brawler-caster-thiefey build (specialising in EITHER defense, close combat, magic or archery seems much better in this game), most encounters throughout the game are tense to a degree. The clunkiness adds to it, and emphasises the narrowness of the corridors you're roaming around in. My sword accidentally swung wide and struck stone a lot.

Your equipment gets damaged and eventually breaks. Unlike other games, I feel like it's decently handled here. Initial makeshift weapons and basic armour only last a few hits. Proper metal weaponry lasts quite a bit longer, and blacksmiths will repair them for a price. So it doesn't become a constant issue that you need to take into account to the point of annoyance. When exploring some chunk of the map a little way from the nearest blacksmith though, you might find you have only one really good weapon available for some tougher enemy, and it's not going to last the fight. I uh, lost a couple of swords in this fashion, uh, totally on purpose.

I really like the way the world opens up, and how much of it is left to the player to figure out. You do get to learn a little of the history of the races you encounter, and the stuff that unfolded prior to the game's events, but books are pretty scarce. There are a couple of libraries that provide many details, and some mages might have a book or two, but not much more. This is a far call from Dishonored's "Dishonored world 101"-esque books sprinkled randomly throughout the game. Arx Fatalis is much more consistent.

The game doesn't tell you everything, far from it. Some of the spells you can cast aren't in your spellbook. You have to work out what the runes mean, and how to come up with new spells. You can kill absolutely everyone, and still complete the game. There's no handholding. Solutions to some puzzles aren't obvious, and may require some patience. Key characters can be bumped off (though obviously, in some cases, a huge amount of people will turn against you), and you'll miss out on most of the story, but it can be done.

The flipside to this is that it's a delicate balance, and sometimes Arx stumbles a bit. Fail to remember or notice some detail about a puzzle, and you'll be stumped for quite a while. Some key items aren't labelled as such, and are hidden in areas that you might not chance upon, meaning you might find yourself clueless and forced to go looking for them throughout the entire map later on... In my case, I resorted to a walkthrough a couple of times.

The game may look dated, and feel dated at times, but the atmosphere it creates is pretty unique. It strayed off the beaten path, and turned out all the better for it, I believe. It's a raw experience, like I said. And it's much better in my book than, say, Dishonored, which stayed very much on the path, and failed to create a believable world, or to instill any sense of wonder and mystery in me, with its telegraphed mechanics, handholding and very gamey level design.