Burnout is quite possibly the first console game I've ever played.
I was 7 or so. It came out in the year 2000 on PS2, I played it sometime before Christmas 2001 at my cousin's in Norfolk. Up 'till then I'd only had a little bit of experience watching classmates playing Pokemon on their Game Boy Color in the playground during school, and possibly Pyjama Sam on the PC. I had no idea what a console was, I think.

This game left an impression on the little child I was back then. I played it again on the rare occasions we visited the British-Irish side of the family. 

Several years later (2006 ? 2007 ?), I bought the game on Gamecube. I also own Burnout 2 : Point of Impact (on GC), Burnout Legends (PSP) and Burnout Paradise. I've played a little Burnout 3 as well.

It's a little tough revisiting this game. I think it has gameplay subtleties related to driving and crashes that are the best in the series, and some great design elements. It's also rather short, visuals have dated (tough to see vehicles in split-screen), and it might feel a little empty and hollow, the same way the house you grew up in might seem tiny and cold and distant when you stay there years later, all grown up and knowing about a much, much larger world out there.

Anyway, Burnout.

Simple concept : drive as fast as possible in rural and urban environments. You slowly fill up a boost gauge if you take specific risks, ie by narrowly missing cars, driving on the wrong side of the road, and drifting like a maniac.

If you use your boost up, depending how dangerously you were driving, your gauge might partly or fully refill after you've spent it. Linking together boost gauges is where Burnout gets its namesake.

This concept works terrifically. 

Later games introduced other games modes : modes where you need to destroy vehicles, modes where you try and maximise crash damage. Burnout 1 only has races. Subsequent games also introduced other means of filling up your boost. Air time in Burnout 2, then opponent car takedowns and lots of other stuff in Burnout 3. From 3 onwards, spectacle is the main objective, and you get rewarded with boost almost constantly.

Not so with the first Burnout game. It is much purer in its ideas and execution. You're not given boost, you *earn* it. It also strikes a really good balance in terms of danger vs reward vs fun.

There are 9 vehicles in the game, 4 to unlock. That's not very many indeed. My car of choice, the Muscle, goes up to 135 mph without boost, 145 when beefed up. 

The difference in speed is minor. It is on the visual side of things. The camera zooms out ever so slightly and the lens angle changes, motion blur kicks in more strongly, and the music fades a little into the background while the engine revs a little louder. Your car becomes harder to steer, of course.

The speed sensation is fast enough that it becomes just that little bit harder to react, too. The game feels very fast, and with that extra sense of danger, constant focus is required to pull through. This may be an arcade racer, but at that speed you can only nudge and shift your car slightly, lest you lose control, struggle to keep it straight and then fail to pass between that oncoming lorry and van on the dual carriageway. 

You need a little mastery to be fast, and you need to know the tracks and traffic as every race has a timer and checkpoints that only partially refill it. That timer became much more lenient in 2, and was removed from 3 onwards. I remember losing in Burnout 1 because the timer ran out. I remember that a lot. In fact, having played a couple hours in the past few days, I remember this happening a few minutes ago. Sometimes, your car will screech to a halt only feet away from the checkpoint, and you will be sad indeed. On rarer occasions, you'll pass the checkpoint as the red GAME OVER text displays on the screen, and you'll get another lease on life. Funny little quirk.

But given the minor speedup boost provides, I suppose that means you could, uh, drive less dangerously and still win ? Possibly ? Drive at 135 mph and only rarely take risks, only use boost when the path ahead seems a little less hazardous ? As long as you're on top of the timer, that's not unreasonable. I've never really done that. I drive like a dangerous idiot. I rarely wait to expend my boost, and consequences are occasionally disastrous.

This is, I believe, where Burnout's game design excels. Sure, you could play it safe. You do need to play a little safe in order to win, the opponent's aren't pushovers. Crash too much and they will leave you in the dust.

But in Burnout, you make your own fun as you go along. You decide to push yourself, and if you push too hard it's your own dumb fault. You do need to put the odds in your favour if you're trailing behind a little, but there is also an extremely stupid kind of satisfaction when you just go with the flow without much forethought.

While traffic patterns are deterministic, there are elements of randomness. Cars can change lanes unpredictably. Arrive too early at an intersection and you might have cars passing in front of you that are really hard to dodge where being a little late would have enabled you to pass through after they'd been. Knowing the track helps a lot, but you're never fully safe from a slightly unpredictable situation or a small error in drift. You might bump slightly into a vehicle and lose control just enough to ram head on into an oncoming lorry.

Subsequent Burnout games changed the player's relationship to the road somewhat. The physics are looser. You can careen into a vehicle and launch it without losing much control. You can careen into a van, and it will spin around or shift a little during the crash. Not so in Burnout 1. Hit a bus and your car stops to a jarring, dead halt. Instantly. Your hood doesn't fly off. Your car just becomes a scrunched-up mess. This feels much more visceral than the cannonball physics in later games. I like it. I wish things had stayed that way for standard races. 2 had parts flying everywhere, but none of the hood deformations you very often see in 1. Shame.

It is hard to cause big pileups in that game. Those rare instances where they do happen are all that more rewarding. You can also crash on your own far more easily in 1. In fact, most crashes are sort of pathetic. You'll clip a van and your car will screech to a halt as the imaginary driver's foot comes off the pedal. It's unimpressive, but visually satisfying. And it's always your fault. This isn't Mario Kart jank, and you never get unfairly stuck in a wall. Never.

Here, the road is *dangerous*. It isn't the whimsical playground it slowly turned into over the course of the series, where you can ram into vehicles and burnout 5 times in a row. This is, in my opinion, partly why I prefer 1 over 2 and 2 over Paradise and Legends. Emphasis is much less on deliberate spectacle and visual explosions of flying parts. It is more about the driving and the danger, and the need to go a little bit faster. Even though the racing still remains quite raw and gritty in the series, 1 is *only* about the racing.

The AI is competent. I don't think there's much rubber-band cheating at play. They aren't too interactive with you, but they do crash a fair bit, so they're a liability when they're ahead of you, and they can overtake you. They don't feel unfair, and you can push them into other vehicles, but it feels more like the kind of two-way push and pull that you'll see in the cinema than the sort of pool table on ice telescoping you'll find from 3 onwards. I think the slight unpredictabilities in traffic means they don't always have the same route or the same speed. Even though the AI likely isn't that deep, I never noticed any particular patterns.

The game has only 9 vehicles, and 14 (16 ?) tracks, half of which are other courses reversed, and many have overlap. 5 championships, a couple of face offs to unlock other vehicles and that's about it. A short game that can be completed in less than two hours by a competent speedrunner, without shortcuts because there aren't any in that game.

Every vehicle feels quite different in its handling. Amongst the unlockable ones there's a tow truck and a bus, and they are way harder to use. Their top speed is actually similar to the Muscle, but they accelerate much more slowly and don't steer as well. The bus was a great incentive to keep playing a little longer.

In a way, too little is plenty, here. The gameplay feels near perfect to me. 

Sure, there are mild annoyances. I dislike the fact that if a vehicle collides with an AI's carcass after you've caused the crash, the financial damage doesn't get counted. The music is a little adaptive (and thankfully devoid of the emo-whiney-I'm a cool guy-rock and DJ radio that 3 introduced and became a staple of the series) and gets more tense as the timer slowly counts down, but one can hear some slightly clunky transitions when reaching checkpoints. There's a nice option to replay and save crashes after a race, but not all of them get saved, so you might miss out on that incredible pileup you wanted to double-check.

But as short and sadly hollow it feels now, this game captured my imagination as a kid in a way the rest of the series hasn't -enjoyable though it mostly remained. I wouldn't recommend playing this game unless Burnout or raw arcade racing is your jam, but I do believe this game holds up in several aspects and did some things better than the other games. It focused on specific aspects of dangerous driving the rest of the series veered away from, and its crashes can be so much more visceral. The visuals certainly are a little dated, but there isn't as much visual clutter.

Some moments have stayed with me more than twenty years. Nothing in the other games even comes close. I can't remember a specific crash from 2, Legends or Paradise. I remember a couple of shortcuts. I remember that I caused pileups in some areas. But I don't remember the actual pileups.

I remember specific crashes in Burnout 1. As a kid, I remember hitting a van, passing over an Armco guardrail and my car falling straight down a cliff through a tree. I've never been able to replicate that crash. There are only a couple of areas where you can really launch your vehicle, and they're rare. They're therefore more meaningful than any one area in later games.

Little secrets. There are no shortcuts, but there's this motorway service area you can drive through on the first course. A couple of tracks have one vehicle driving on the wrong side of the road. Are they overtaking ? Well... I dunno. 1 is the only Burnout game to have that visceral satisfaction of seeing an AI overtake you then immediately crash into something.

This is one of the games of my childhood. I might have played about 30 different games between 2000 and 2007 (mostly game boy games), but only about 10 or so I would call 'games of my childhood'. The kind I can't revisit without having that mix of childhood wonder and later nostalgia and sadness. That's just how it is, unfortunately, I've changed too much. 

I didn't know much else back then, so obviously it left much stronger impressions than it would on someone with other gaming experiences. I still think it captured elements of the perfect arcade racer.