---
layout: post
title: "Open-World games, part One"
published: true
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

You should probably only play one game of any open-world franchise, if you value immersion and such, or else

<!--more-->

Yup, this is the open-world article.

I swear the title isn't clickbait. As someone who values specific immersion, world believability, and consistency, many open-world games range, in my book, from interesting but pretty flawed to kind of shit.

Note that my experience with modern open-worlds is "somewhat limited". A little Borderlands, a little Breath of the Wild, a little Watchdogs, a little Spiderman, some brief Assassin's Creed Odyssey. I completed The Witcher 3. Burnout Paradise.

And then some older stuff, or some non-AAA, too. Don't forget the older open-worlds and pretend it all started with the PS3/X360 gen, GTA III is a bit older than that (haven't played that one though). Hey, Pokemon is an open-world and that came out on the Game Boy. Heck, Zelda 1 came out in 1987.

Waaaait a minute here. *Goes through backlog of played games* System Shock. Anachronox. Shantae. Arx Fatalis. Outcast. Gothic.

Is the first Metroid open-world ? (Is Devil Daggers open-w-okI'llstopnow) When did we start calling games open-world games ? Is it a genre now ? Why isn't Proteus an open-world game but a walking simulator ? And why weren't those earlier games named as such ? Is it that open-world games are either so otherwise empty that that's all they have as a selling point ? Or did some specific subset of games become so entrenched in specific design choices that they have heavily converged to similar experiences ?

I would say that it's a bit of both. And this convergence isn't without reasons. Unfortunately, those reasons don't have that much to do with overall game quality, artfulness, exploration of uncharted gameplay territory. More so with development constraints, very high building costs requiring very large teams and a market that has worked itself into a corner.

Modern open-worlds have some pretty complicated problems to solve. On a technical level, constant asset streaming, simulation of many entities, some possibly quite distant, and of course, you have this huge expanse of space and you need to render huge chunks of it when the player has a high vantage point. Those are not trivial problems. At all.

And then, from a design perspective : how should we tell the story ? Should it be linear and cause some arbitrary and very on-rails travelling about ? Should it be freeform, but then require a lot of redundancy and extra complexity since no assumptions can be made regarding what the players knows at any given point in time ? Should we have a conversation mode that pauses the world so that the story can be passed on without outside interference caused by the player ?

Content creation. What should the level builders manually tweak, and what should be fully procedurally generated ?

Should difficulty be globally adaptive to the player, or is it dependent on the area traversed or encountered type of enemy ? Should it only depend on how much they ramp up ? How should the player ramp up in the first place ? Do they unlock areas one at a time, do they level up ? Do they unlock gadgets which they could upgrade ?

What about music ? How should it adjust to the situation ? The player might be fucking around in an area very close to a deeply tragic story setpiece, would tragic music be appropriate in all cases ? Should it always be nondescript discreete ambient instead since no assumptions can be made about player mood ?

How does the player move through this world ? Is there fast travel ? Should we allow them to get lost ?

What do we do with all that space ? Do we give it meaning ? Should we fill it with collectibles ? Should we keep giving it purpose after the story is done, and the player's presence in that world might not be that consistent ?

With *MODERN* AAA open-world, the amount of stuff you need to do to make an open-world is gigantic. Financial investment is huge. You might be able to get away with only a few expert programmers and main designers, but you need potentially dozens of artists, many playtesters, and a hefty QA team. Many design decisions have drastic, almost irreversible (or hugely expensive to revert) technical consequences. This gives less room for constant freeform prototyping loops. You need to lock in some decisions pretty early on.

Financial investment being so huge means *very* little risk-taking. Consensual design decisions. Smooth, controlled, risk-averse gameplay. That engine you made or licensed better be reused elsewhere. Recycled content, occasionally. And of course, marketing focuses around some very specific aspects. The amount of sidequests. The size of the world. The graphics. Heavily zeroing-in on those means you have to sacrifice a lot elsewhere. So much effort is spent getting the game to be pretty and to be pretty fucking big that that's what companies get best at optimising.

Low risk-taking also means heavy consensuality (and, in Ubisoft's case, consanguinity). What do the others do ? Let's do the same, it's less risky to make *and market and sell*, players have been used to these adverts for years now. Critics lap that up, too, even when the rest of the game is mediocre on many other aspects. Even if quality standards of earlier game generations would have considered some decisions bad, or unacceptable, as long as it's an open-world, it's part of a known franchise, there are no major fuckups and above all it's B.I.G., it'll sell. It's a much darker unknown to take a step in a different direction.

In fact, many open-worlds are iterations over several games. Batman : Arkham whatnot ? Arkham Asylum, the first one, was not open-world. Neither were Witcher 1 and 2. Zelda games were sort-of-open-world before BOTW came along and was definitely-open-world. Although many assets and systems had to be created from scratch for the new trope, many implicit assumptions that players had already bought into could be carried over. Whatever risks one might consider some of them took were in fact mitigated from the start. Many people play the Witcher 3 for the story that expands the past couple of games. People can play

Immersion ? Absolutely critical in the past, very secondary now. How much you can adjust your suspense of disbelief is always dependent on your past experiences, of course... That's not the whole picture though. Technical limitations were, at one time, well, technical limitations. Design had to work around it, it wasn't a choice. Nowadays, specific decisions which very clearly hamper immersion and world believability are *built-in features*. Big difference. Ubisoft games have some (shoddy, in my opinion) design decisions that negatively impact gameplay but are part of their trademark. Watchdogs, The Crew, Assassin's Creed and other Ubisoft games all have similar mechanics that make them very familiar to players who've already touched another of their games. This might make it easier to accustom players to specific game pace and UI decisions, but it also enhances future risk-averseness...

With all that being said, what do I feel do most games get wrong ?

Uh, most of it. Usually. I suppose.

-To be continued-