---
layout: post
title: Welcome.
---

This space is a blog where (at least at the start) I'll upload some reviews of games I've played. 

I used to write reviews in French on another site, and it was enough for me. But friends that also were on this site left it after a while, and I've been less and less active there. After a review I wrote in English triggered their anti-spam system, I decided it might be time to move the stuff I've written elsewhere.

The Github/Jekyll Now system is REALLY easy to setup, so even a lazy twerp like myself has little excuse not to make the transition of those reviews to a personal website.

The Witcher 3 is an original review, the others I'll be uploading initially are a fair bit older, I'll try and make sure that's explicit. The dates are currently rather arbitrary, for reasons I can't be bothered to explain. The site was started around 10th March 2019, and the Witcher 3 is the game with the most recent review (written in Feb. 2019). Anything before that in the main page is older.

I'll probably go through some of those reviews again and add a few comments.

I'm not a professional critic by any means, nor is my prose particularly enjoyable to read. But perhaps you'll find a couple of interesting tidbits here and there.

Oh yeah, this site looks really basic and generic. It's probably going to stay that way for the forseeable future.

Anyway, have fun. If you're not having fun, the 'About' page will contain links to other websites where you may hope to find better prose.